JVI -- Seiler et al. 72 (3): 2253  
       

             Abstract of this Article () 
             Reprint (PDF) Version of this Article 
             Similar articles found in:
            JVI Online 
            PubMed 
             PubMed Citation 
             This Article has been cited by: 
            other online articles 
             Search Medline for articles by:
             Seiler, P. || Hengartner, H. 
             Alert me when: 
            new articles cite this article

             Download to Citation Manager 

      Books from ASM Press

J Virol, March 1998, p. 2253-2258, Vol. 72, No. 3
0022-538X/98/$04.00+0
Copyright © 1998, American Society for Microbiology. All rights reserved. 
Enhanced Virus Clearance by Early Inducible Lymphocytic Choriomeningitis 
Virus-Neutralizing Antibodies in Immunoglobulin-Transgenic Mice 
Peter Seiler,1,* Ulrich Kalinke,1 Thomas Rülicke,2 Etienne M. Bucher,1 Christian 
Böse,1, Rolf M. Zinkernagel,1 and Hans Hengartner1 
Department of Pathology, Institute of Experimental Immunology, University of 
Zurich,1 and Biologisches Zentrallabor, University Hospital Zurich,2 CH 8091 
Zurich, Switzerland 
Received 1 October 1997/Accepted 24 November 1997 
         ABSTRACT
       Top 
       Abstract 
       Introduction 
       Materials & Methods 
       Results 
       Discussion 
       References 
Following infection of mice with lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV), 
virus-neutralizing antibodies appear late, after 30 to 60 days. Such 
neutralizing antibodies play an important role in protection against 
reinfection. To analyze whether a neutralizing antibody response which developed 
earlier could contribute to LCMV clearance during the acute phase of infection, 
we generated transgenic mice expressing LCMV-neutralizing antibodies. Transgenic 
mice expressing the immunoglobulin µ heavy chain of the LCMV-neutralizing 
monoclonal antibody KL25 (H25 transgenic mice) mounted LCMV-neutralizing 
immunoglobulin M (IgM) serum titers within 8 days after infection. This early 
inducible LCMV-neutralizing antibody response significantly improved the host's 
capacity to clear the infection and did not cause an enhancement of disease 
after intracerebral (i.c.) LCMV infection. In contrast, mice which had been 
passively administered LCMV-neutralizing antibodies and transgenic mice 
exhibiting spontaneous LCMV-neutralizing IgM serum titers (HL25 transgenic mice 
expressing the immunoglobulin µ heavy and the  light chain) showed an 
enhancement of disease after i.c. LCMV infection. Thus, early-inducible 
LCMV-neutralizing antibodies can contribute to viral clearance in the acute 
phase of the infection and do not cause antibody-dependent enhancement of 
disease. 
         INTRODUCTION
       Top 
       Abstract 
       Introduction 
       Materials & Methods 
       Results 
       Discussion 
       References 
Against many cytopathic viruses such as poliovirus, influenza virus, rabies 
virus, and vesicular stomatitis virus, protective virus-neutralizing antibodies 
are generated early, within 1 week after infection (3, 31, 36, 44, 49). In 
contrast, several noncytopathic viruses (e.g., human immunodeficiency virus and 
hepatitis viruses B and C in humans or lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus [LCMV] 
in mice) elicit poor and delayed virus-neutralizing antibody responses (1, 7, 
20, 24, 27, 35, 45, 48). 
In the mouse, the natural host of LCMV, the acute LCMV infection is 
predominantly controlled by cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) in an obligatory 
perforin-dependent manner (13, 18, 28, 50). In addition to the CTL response, 
LCMV-specific antibodies are generated. Early after infection (by day 8), a 
strong antibody response specific for the internal viral nucleoprotein (NP) is 
mounted (7, 19, 23, 28). These early LCMV NP-specific antibodies exhibit no 
virus-neutralizing capacity (7, 10). Results from studies of B-cell-depleted 
mice and B-cell-deficient mice implied that the early LCMV NP-specific 
antibodies are not involved in the clearance of LCMV (8, 11, 12, 40). Late after 
infection (between days 30 and day 60), LCMV-neutralizing antibodies develop (7, 
19, 22, 28, 33); these antibodies are directed against the surface glycoprotein 
(GP) of LCMV (9, 10). LCMV-neutralizing antibodies have an important function in 
protection against reinfection (4, 6, 38, 41, 47). 
In some viral infections, subprotective virus-neutralizing antibody titers can 
enhance disease rather than promote host recovery (i.e., exhibit 
antibody-dependent enhancement of disease [ADE] [14, 15, 21, 46]). For example, 
neutralizing antibodies are involved in the resolution of a primary dengue virus 
infection and in the protection against reinfection. However, if subprotective 
neutralizing antibody titers are present at the time of reinfection, a severe 
form of the disease (dengue hemorrhagic fever/dengue shock syndrome [15, 21]), 
which might be caused by Fc receptor-mediated uptake of virus-antibody complexes 
leading to an enhanced infection of monocytes (15, 16, 25, 39), can develop. 
Similarly, an enhancement of disease after intracerebral (i.c.) LCMV infection 
was observed in mice which had been treated with virus-neutralizing antibodies 
before the virus challenge (6). ADE in LCMV-infected mice was either due to an 
enhanced infection of monocytes by Fc receptor-mediated uptake of antibody-virus 
complexes or due to CTL-mediated immunopathology caused by an imbalanced virus 
spread and CTL response. 
To analyze whether LCMV-neutralizing antibodies generated early after infection 
improve the host's capacity to clear the virus or enhance immunopathological 
disease, immunoglobulin (Ig)-transgenic mice expressing LCMV-neutralizing IgM 
antibodies were generated. After LCMV infection of transgenic mice expressing 
the Ig heavy chain (H25 transgenic mice), LCMV-neutralizing serum antibodies 
were mounted within 8 days, which significantly improved the host's capacity to 
eliminate LCMV. H25 transgenic mice did not show any signs of ADE after i.c. 
LCMV infection. 
Transgenic mice expressing the Ig heavy and light chains (HL25 transgenic mice) 
exhibited spontaneous LCMV-neutralizing serum antibodies and confirmed the 
protective role of preexisting LCMV-neutralizing antibodies, even though the 
neutralizing serum antibodies were of the IgM isotype. Similar to mice which had 
been treated with LCMV-neutralizing antibodies, HL25 transgenic mice developed 
an enhanced disease after i.c. LCMV infection, which indicated that ADE was due 
to an imbalance between virus spread and CTL response. Thus, the early-inducible 
LCMV-neutralizing antibody response significantly enhanced clearance of the 
acute infection without any risk of causing ADE. 
         MATERIALS AND METHODS
       Top 
       Abstract 
       Introduction 
       Materials & Methods 
       Results 
       Discussion 
       References 
Generation of transgenic mice. Gene segments coding for the Ig heavy-chain V 
(VH) region and Ig light-chain V (VL) region were cloned from the B-cell 
hybridoma KL25 (9), which neutralized the LCMV isolate WE. The VH segment 
contained the autologous promoter, the rearranged VDJ region, and the 
heavy-chain intron enhancer. It was isolated from a  ZAP library (Stratagene, La 
Jolla, Calif.) generated from EcoRI-digested KL25 genomic DNA by using an intron 
enhancer-specific probe. The EcoRI fragment containing the VH region was ligated 
into the EcoRI site of a transgene expression vector encoding the genomic Cµ 
region of mouse IgM allotype a (Cµa) (30). 
The VL region of KL25 was PCR amplified from KL25 genomic DNA by using a 
V4-specific primer (5'- AAA AGA GCT CAA AAT GGA TTT TCA AGT GCA GAT TTT -3', 
annealing at the first 23 nucleotides of the V4 leader and introducing a SacI 
site 5' of amino acid position 22) and a J4-specific primer (5'- TAT ACT TAC GTT 
TTA TTT CCA ACT TTG TCC CCG -3', annealing at the 3' end of the J4 segment 
including the sequence of the splice donor signal). The resulting PCR product 
containing the light-chain leader, the intron, and the rearranged VJ region of 
the light chain (VL) was cloned into the EcoRV site of pBluescript. After 
verification of the sequence of the PCR-derived fragment by automated DNA 
sequencing (Bio-Rad, Hercules, Calif.), the SacI/HindIII fragment containing the 
VL gene was ligated into the SacI/HindIII sites of a C expression vector 
encoding the mouse  light-chain C (C) region (42). 
To prepare DNA for microinjection, the µ heavy-chain transgene was excised by 
using restriction endonucleases AatII and XhoI, and the  light-chain transgene 
was linearized at the unique XbaI site. 
The two transgene constructs were coinjected into male pronuclei of fertilized 
oocytes of the mouse strain C57BL/6 LTK. Transgene integrations were screened by 
PCR and Southern blot analysis. Inbred C57BL/6 (H-2b) mice from the breeding 
colony of the Institut für Zuchthygiene, Tierspital Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland, 
were used as donors for fertilized oocytes. 
Virus. LCMV-WE was originally provided by F. Lehmann-Grube, Hamburg, Germany, 
and was grown on L-929 cells for 48 h in minimal essential medium-5% fetal calf 
serum after infection with an initial multiplicity of infection of 0.01. 
FACS analysis. Fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) analysis was performed 
on a FACScan (Becton Dickinson, San Diego, Calif.) according to standard 
procedures. The following antibodies were used: rat anti-mouse CD45R 
(B220)-phycoerythrin conjugate (Sigma, St. Louis, Mo.) and mouse anti-mouse IgMa 
(the constant domain of mouse IgM allotype a [30])-fluorescein isothiocyanate 
conjugate (PharMingen, San Diego, Calif.). Living cells were gated by using a 
combination of forward scatter and 90° side scatter. 
LCMV infectious focus formation assay. Viral titers from spleens of infected 
mice were determined as described previously (5). Briefly, spleen homogenates 
were serially diluted 10-fold and grown on an MC57G cell monolayer for 48 h 
under an overlay of 1% methylcellulose in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium. 
Cells were fixed with 4% formalin in phosphate-buffered saline, and infectious 
foci were detected by intracellular LCMV staining of infected cells with the rat 
anti-LCMV monoclonal antibody (MAb) VL-4 (5). 
LCMV neutralization in vitro: infectious focus reduction assay. LCMV 
neutralization in vitro was determined with an infectious focus reduction assay 
as described previously (5). Briefly, serial 2-fold dilutions of 
10-fold-prediluted sera were incubated with LCMV for 90 min at 37°C in a 96-well 
plate. MC57G mouse fibroblasts were added, and after approximately 4 h, when the 
cells had settled and had absorbed the nonneutralized virus, cells were overlaid 
with 1% methylcellulose in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium; 48 h later, cell 
monolayers were fixed with 4% formalin and remaining infectious foci were 
detected as in the focus formation assay by intracellular LCMV staining of 
infected cells with the rat anti-LCMV MAb VL-4. Sera were tested under 
nonreducing conditions to measure neutralization by total Ig. To obtain values 
for IgG, sera were reduced prior to the neutralization assay by adding 
2-mercaptoethanol at a final concentration of 0.05 M for 90 min at room 
temperature. Sera were heat inactivated at 56°C for 60 min. 
Cytotoxicity assay. The cytolytic activity of spleen cells was tested in a 51Cr 
release assay as described previously (50). Briefly, MC57G target cells were 
coated with LCMV-derived peptide GP33-41 (32) or NP396-408 (37) or with an 
H-2Db-binding adenovirus peptide (26) as a negative control at concentrations of 
106 M; 104 target cells were incubated in 96-well round-bottom plates with 
serial threefold dilutions of spleen effector cells starting at an 
effector-to-target ratio of 70:1 in a final volume of 200 µl. After 5 h of 
incubation at 37°C, 70 µl of supernatant was harvested and  irradiation was 
measured. 
         RESULTS
       Top 
       Abstract 
       Introduction 
       Materials & Methods 
       Results 
       Discussion 
       References 
Generation of the Ig-transgenic mouse lines H25 and HL25 expressing lymphocytic 
choriomeningitis virus-specific neutralizing antibodies. The VH and VL gene 
segments of the B-cell hybridoma KL25 (9) secreting an LCMV-neutralizing MAb 
were cloned and ligated into transgene expression vectors encoding IgMa and C 
(42), respectively (Fig. 1). Both constructs were microinjected into C57BL/6 
oocytes. Integration and germ line transmission of the transgenes were monitored 
by PCR and Southern blot analysis (data not shown). Multiple transgene 
integrations in one founder led to the establishment of two independent 
transgenic mouse lines: the transgenic mouse line H25 expressed the transgenic 
heavy chain, whereas the transgenic mouse line HL25 expressed both the 
transgenic heavy and light chains. 

            View larger version (11K): 
            [in this window] 
            [in a new window]
              FIG. 1.   Structure of the Ig transgene constructs. (A) µ 
            heavy-chain transgene; (B)  light-chain transgene. Filled boxes 
            represent Ig exons, hatched boxes represent antibiotic resistance 
            genes, and open boxes, represent cis-acting promoter elements. The 
            heavy- and light-chain constructs were linearized prior to 
            microinjection by using restriction endonucleases AatII and XhoI 
            (heavy chain) and XbaI (light chain). IE, Ig heavy-chain intron 
            enhancer; P, autologous promoter of the cloned VH gene segment; P, 
            consensus  light-chain promoter. 



Expression of the transgenic IgMa heavy chain on the surface of B220-positive B 
cells from peripheral blood lymphocytes, spleen cells, and bone marrow cells of 
H25 and HL25 transgenic mice was determined by FACS analysis (Fig. 2). The 
proportion of cells expressing the surface IgMa was lower in H25 transgenic mice 
than in HL25 transgenic mice. This might be due either to the coexpression of 
the optimally fitting transgenes encoding the heavy and the light chains in HL25 
transgenic mice or to different genomic integration sites of the heavy-chain 
transgenes in the two different transgenic mouse lines. 

            View larger version (39K): 
            [in this window] 
            [in a new window]
              FIG. 2.   Surface expression of IgMa on B cells of H25 and HL25 
            transgenic mice. IgMa and B220 were stained on blood cells, spleen 
            cells, and bone marrow cells of H25 transgenic mice, HL25 transgenic 
            mice, and transgene-negative control mice (B6). Numbers in quadrants 
            indicate percentages of gated living cells. 



Expression of early-inducible versus spontaneous LCMV-neutralizing antibodies in 
H25 and HL25 transgenic mice. Sera of H25 and HL25 transgenic mice were analyzed 
for the presence of spontaneous LCMV-neutralizing serum antibodies by the 
infectious focus reduction assay (5). H25 transgenic mice did not express 
spontaneous LCMV-neutralizing serum antibodies, whereas HL25 transgenic mice 
showed LCMV-neutralizing antibody titers before the antigen challenge (Fig. 3A 
and B, day 0). After intravenous (i.v.) infection with 200 PFU of LCMV-WE, H25 
transgenic mice mounted an LCMV-neutralizing Ig response peaking between days 8 
and 11 after LCMV infection. In contrast, the spontaneous neutralizing titers of 
HL25 transgenic mice did not change after infection. Sera of nontransgenic 
control mice did not show any neutralizing activity within the observation 
period of 50 days (Fig. 3C). The neutralizing capacity of all sera was abolished 
when tested under reducing conditions, indicating that the virus neutralization 
was mediated by IgM antibodies presumably encoded by the transgenes. 

            View larger version (19K): 
            [in this window] 
            [in a new window]
              FIG. 3.   LCMV-WE-neutralizing antibody titers in the sera of H25 
            and HL25 transgenic mice. H25 and HL25 transgenic mice and transgene 
            negative control (ctrl) mice were infected i.v. with 200 PFU of 
            LCMV-WE. Sera were collected at the indicated time points and were 
            tested for virus-neutralizing total Ig (nonreducing conditions; 
            closed symbols) and IgG (reducing conditions; open symbols) in an 
            infectious focus reduction assay. Sera were prediluted 10-fold and 
            titrated in 2-fold dilution steps. Values are for individual mice 
            from one representative experiment of five similar experiments. 



Enhanced virus elimination in H25 transgenic mice expressing early-inducible 
neutralizing antibodies. To analyze the influence of early-inducible versus 
preexisting LCMV-neutralizing antibodies on virus elimination, H25 and HL25 
transgenic mice and transgene-negative littermates were infected i.v. with 200 
PFU of LCMV-WE. Virus titers in the spleen were monitored from days 1 to 10 
after infection. Early-neutralizing serum antibodies induced in H25 transgenic 
mice did not influence LCMV titers significantly up to day 4 after infection but 
thereafter reduced virus titers significantly and enhanced virus elimination 
(Fig. 4). This result demonstrated for the first time that the early generation 
of LCMV-neutralizing antibodies improved the host's efficiency in eliminating 
LCMV. 

            View larger version (23K): 
            [in this window] 
            [in a new window]
              FIG. 4.   H25 transgenic mice clear LCMV earlier than control 
            mice. H25 and HL25 transgenic mice and transgene-negative control 
            (ctrl) littermates were infected i.v. with 200 PFU of LCMV-WE. At 
            days 1 to 10, spleens were tested for virus titers in an infectious 
            focus formation assay. Virus titers per spleen of individual mice 
            are indicated. The log titer of 1.7 is the detection limit of the 
            assay. Values are for individual mice from one representative 
            experiment of three similar experiments. 



Preexisting neutralizing serum antibody titers of HL25 transgenic mice inhibited 
LCMV replication in the spleen from the day of infection onward. These mice were 
protected against i.v. infection, even though the transgene-encoded antibodies 
were of the IgM isotype. This result is in agreement with earlier findings 
demonstrating the protective capacity of passively administered 
LCMV-neutralizing antibodies (4, 6, 38, 41, 47). 
H25 transgenic mice develop normal CTL activity. To analyze whether the enhanced 
LCMV elimination was due to the early LCMV-neutralizing antibody response or due 
to an enhanced CTL activity, H25 and HL25 transgenic mice and transgene-negative 
littermates were infected i.v. with 200 PFU of LCMV-WE. Eight days later, spleen 
cells were tested for cytolytic activity in a primary ex vivo 51Cr release 
assay. H25 transgenic mice showed an almost normal or even slightly reduced CTL 
activity compared to transgene negative littermates (Fig. 5). HL25 transgenic 
mice exhibited no measurable CTL activity. This finding indicated that the 
complete antiviral protection in HL25 transgenic mice and the enhanced clearance 
of LCMV in H25 transgenic mice were mediated by the transgene-encoded antibodies 
and were not due to an enhanced CTL activity. 

            View larger version (33K): 
            [in this window] 
            [in a new window]
              FIG. 5.   CTL activity in H25 and HL25 transgenic mice. H25 and 
            HL25 transgenic mice and transgene-negative control (ctrl) 
            littermates were infected i.v. with 200 PFU of LCMV-WE. Eight days 
            later, spleen cells were tested for cytolytic activity in a 5-h 51Cr 
            release assay. MC57G target cells were labeled with the 
            LCMV-specific peptide GP33-41 or NP396-408 or an irrelevant, 
            H-2Db-binding adenovirus (Adeno) peptide. Percentages of specific 
            lysis by splenic effectors of individual mice are plotted at the 
            indicated effector/target (E/T) ratios. Spontaneous release was 
            below 17%. Values are for individual mice from one representative 
            experiment of three similar experiments. 



ADE by preexisting LCMV-neutralizing IgM antibodies. Within 7 to 8 days, mice 
succumbed to a low-dose (30-PFU) i.c. infection with LCMV-WE caused by 
CTL-mediated immunopathology. However, they survived a high-dose (105-PFU) i.c. 
infection because LCMV-specific CTLs were exhausted (17, 29) (Fig. 6A). If 200 
µg of the LCMV-neutralizing IgG1 MAb KL25 was administered intraperitoneally 4 h 
before i.c. virus challenge, mice died after low and high doses of infection (6) 
(Fig. 6B). To test whether such an ADE after high-dose i.c. infection also 
occurred in H25 and HL25 transgenic mice, Ig-transgenic mice were infected i.c. 
with low- or high-dose LCMV-WE. As expected, the majority of H25 transgenic mice 
infected i.c. with low-dose LCMV-WE died. However, all H25 transgenic mice 
infected i.c. with high-dose LCMV-WE survived, indicating the absence of ADE 
(Fig. 6C). In contrast, 100 and 60% of HL25 transgenic mice infected i.c. with 
low-dose or high-dose LCMV-WE, respectively, died, indicating the presence of 
ADE (Fig. 6D). Thus, ADE was observed in mice treated with MAb KL25 and in HL25 
transgenic mice exhibiting spontaneous LCMV-neutralizing antibody titers. In 
constrast, ADE was absent in normal mice which do not generate LCMV-neutralizing 
antibodies before day 30 and in H25 transgenic mice which mount an inducible 
LCMV-neutralizing antibody response after i.c. infection by day 8, similar to 
what was observed after i.v. infection (data not shown). Since after LCMV 
infection neutralizing IgM antibodies are observed in H25 and HL25 transgenic 
mice, enhancement of disease via binding to polymeric Fc receptor (2, 34, 43) 
should have occurred in both Ig-transgenic mice. Therefore, our results indicate 
that ADE of lymphocytic choriomeningitis presumably is caused by an 
antibody-influenced shift of the balance between virus spread and the CTL 
response. 

            View larger version (23K): 
            [in this window] 
            [in a new window]
              FIG. 6.   Early-inducible LCMV-neutralizing antibodies in H25 mice 
            do not enhance lethal choriomeningitis. H25 and HL25 transgenic mice 
            were infected i.c. with 30 PFU (closed symbols) or 105 PFU (open 
            symbols) LCMV-WE. Control mice were either passively treated 
            intraperitoneally with 200 µg of MAb KL25 4 h prior to infection or 
            left untreated and were i.c. infected as were the Ig-transgenic 
            mice. Survival was monitored from days 1 to 14. Each group consisted 
            of 6 to 10 mice. Shown are results of one of two similar 
            experiments. ctrl, control. 



         DISCUSSION
       Top 
       Abstract 
       Introduction 
       Materials & Methods 
       Results 
       Discussion 
       References 
In this present study, we cloned the gene segments encoding the VH and VL 
regions of the LCMV-neutralizing MAb KL25 and expressed them as µ heavy and  
light chains in transgenic mice. We established two independent mouse lines 
expressing the transgenic heavy chain (H25 transgenic mice) or both the 
transgenic heavy and light chains (HL25 transgenic mice). H25 transgenic mice 
developed LCMV-neutralizing IgM serum titers early after infection, which 
augmented elimination of the virus. These experiments demonstrated that 
early-inducible LCMV-neutralizing antibody titers supported the control of a 
noncytopathic virus during the acute phase of the infection and indicated a 
potentially important role of LCMV-neutralizing antibodies in clearance of the 
virus. 
The HL25 transgenic mice exhibited spontaneous LCMV-neutralizing antibody serum 
titers which protected against i.v. infection, even though the transgene-encoded 
antibodies were of the IgM isotype. This finding is in accordance with previous 
reports showing the protective capacity of passively administered IgG antibodies 
(4, 6, 38, 41, 47). 
The enhanced capacity of the H25 and HL25 transgenic mice to eliminate LCMV was 
not due to an enhanced CTL activity. Ex vivo CTL activity was always lower in 
H25 transgenic mice than in transgene-negative littermates and was below 
detection limits in HL25 transgenic mice. Obviously, the early-developing 
LCMV-neutralizing antibodies in H25 transgenic mice allowed an almost normal 
priming of CTLs, whereas the spontaneous titers of LCMV-neutralizing antibodies 
in HL25 transgenic mice neutralized LCMV quantitatively and prevented induction 
of CTLs. Therefore, the improvement of LCMV clearance in H25 and HL25 transgenic 
mice was mediated by the transgene-encoded antibodies. 
Earlier studies suggested some role of the antibody-Fc part for in vivo 
protection, since LCMV-neutralizing MAbs of the IgG2a isotype protected from 
lethal lymphocytic choriomeningitis, whereas MAbs of the IgG1 isotype did not 
(4). This was further supported by the finding that the F(ab')2 fragment 
generated proteolytically from one protective IgG2a MAb did not protect (4). The 
LCMV-neutralizing MAb KL25, which is of the IgG1 subclass, was protective 
against i.v. LCMV infection in an in vivo passive immunization experiment (38). 
After transferring the LCMV GP1 specificity of MAb KL25 to the IgM isotype, the 
transgenic IgM retained the in vitro neutralizing capacity and was protective in 
vivo. These results indicated that the isotype dependence of in vivo antiviral 
protection against LCMV infection is related to the antibody specificity 
analyzed. 
Mice passively immunized with LCMV-neutralizing antibodies showed ADE of 
choriomeningitis after i.c. infection with a high dose (105 PFU) of LCMV-WE (6). 
This was due either to enhanced infection of monocytes with virus-antibody 
complexes via their Fc receptors or to an antibody-mediated shift of the balance 
between virus spread and the CTL response leading to CTL-mediated 
immunopathology (6). In our experiments, the transferred MAb KL25 and the 
preexisting LCMV-neutralizing antibodies in HL25 transgenic mice led to ADE 
after high-dose i.c. infection, whereas the inducible LCMV-neutralizing 
antibodies in H25 transgenic mice did not. Since LCMV-neutralizing IgM 
antibodies are generated after infection of H25 transgenic mice, an enhanced 
infection of monocytes should have occurred in H25 transgenic mice as well as in 
HL25 transgenic mice via the binding to the polymeric Fc receptor (2, 34, 43). 
Obviously, the inducible virus-neutralizing serum antibodies are generated too 
late to influence the balance between virus spread and CTL response. Therefore, 
ADE of lymphocytic choriomeningitis presumably is due to an imbalance between 
virus spread and CTL response mediated by preexisting neutralizing antibody 
titers. 
In conclusion, we demonstrated that early-generated LCMV-neutralizing antibodies 
enhanced clearance of LCMV after i.v. infection without the risk for ADE after 
i.c. infection. Therefore, vaccination strategies accelerating 
virus-neutralizing antibody responses may enhance clearance of noncytopathic 
viruses without the risk of causing ADE. 
         ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank H. Gram and A. Traunecker for providing the Ig transgene expression 
vectors, G. Christiansen and D. Zimmerman for synthesis of the oligonucleotides, 
and K. Karlsson, S. Walser-Förster, J. Brecher, and K. Riem for excellent and 
always patient technical support. Special thanks go to P. Aichele, B. M. Senn, 
T. Uhr, and the entire institute for very helpful discussions. 
This work was supported by Swiss National Science Foundation grants 31.32179.91 
and 31.50884.97 and by the Kanton Zürich, Switzerland. 
         FOOTNOTES

* Corresponding author. Mailing address: Institute of Experimental Immunology, 
Department of Pathology, University Hospital Zürich, Schmelzbergstrasse 12, 
CH-8091 Zürich, Switzerland. Phone: 41-1-255 2989. Fax: 41-1-255 4420. E-mail: 
sep@pathol.unizh.ch. 
 Present address: Johns Hopkins University, Department of Neuroscience, 
Baltimore, MD 21205. 
         REFERENCES
       Top 
       Abstract 
       Introduction 
       Materials & Methods 
       Results 
       Discussion 
       References 

      1. Alberti, A., P. Pontisso, G. Tagariello, D. Cavalletto, L. Chemello, 
      and F. Belussi. 1988. Antibody response to pre-S2 and hepatitis B virus 
      induced liver damage. Lancet 25:1421-1424. 
      2. Andersson, B., A. C. Skoglund, M. Ronnholm, T. Lindsten, E. W. Lamon, 
      E. W. Collisson, and A. S. Walia. 1981. Functional aspects of IgM and IgG 
      Fc receptors on murine T lymphocytes. Immunol. Rev. 56:5-50[Medline]. 
      3. Baer, G. M., W. J. Bellini, and D. B. Fishbein. 1990. Rhabdoviruses, p. 
      883-930. In B. N. Fields, and D. M. Knipe (ed.), Virology. Raven Press, 
      New York, N.Y. 
      4. Baldridge, J. R., and M. J. Buchmeier. 1992. Mechanisms of 
      antibody-mediated protection against lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus 
      infection: mother-to-baby transfer of humoral protection. J. Virol. 
      66:4252-4257[Abstract]. 
      5. Battegay, M., S. Cooper, A. Althage, J. Baenziger, H. Hengartner, and 
      R. M. Zinkernagel. 1991. Quantification of lymphocytic choriomeningitis 
      virus with an immunological focus assay in 24 or 96 well plates. J. Virol. 
      Methods 33:191-198[Medline]. 
      6. Battegay, M., D. Kyburz, H. Hengartner, and R. M. Zinkernagel. 1993. 
      Enhancement of disease by neutralizing antiviral antibodies in the absence 
      of primed antiviral cytotoxic T cells. Eur. J. Immunol. 
      23:3236-3241[Medline]. 
      7. Battegay, M., D. Moskophidis, H. Waldner, M. A. Bründler, W. P. 
      Fung-Leung, T. W. Mak, H. Hengartner, and R. M. Zinkernagel. 1993. 
      Impairment and delay of neutralizing antiviral antibody responses by virus 
      specific cytotoxic T cells. J. Immunol. 151:5408-5415[Abstract/Free Full 
      Text]. 
      8. Bründler, M.-A., P. Aichele, M. F. Bachmann, D. Kitamura, K. Rajewsky, 
      and R. M. Zinkernagel. 1996. Immunity to viruses in B cell-deficient mice: 
      influence of antibodies on virus persistence and on T cell memory. Eur. J. 
      Immunol. 26:2257-2262[Medline]. 
      9. Bruns, M., J. Cihak, G. Müller, and F. Lehmann-Grube. 1983. Lymphocytic 
      choriomeningitis virus. VI. Isolation of a glycoprotein mediating 
      neutralization. Virology 130:247-251[Medline]. 
      10. Buchmeier, M. J., H. A. Lewicki, O. Tomori, and M. B. A. Oldstone. 
      1981. Monoclonal antibodies to lymphocytic choriomeningitis and pichinde 
      viruses: generation, characterization, and cross-reactivity with other 
      arenaviruses. Virology 113:73-85[Medline]. 
      11. Cerny, A., A. W. Hügin, S. Sutter, H. Bazin, H. Hengartner, and R. M. 
      Zinkernagel. 1986. Immunity to lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus in B 
      cell-depleted mice: evidence for B cell and antibody independent 
      protection by memory T cells. Eur. J. Immunol. 16:913-917[Medline]. 
      12. Cerny, A., S. Sutter, H. Bazin, H. Hengartner, and R. M. Zinkernagel. 
      1988. Clearance of lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus in antibody- and 
      B-cell-deprived mice. J. Virol. 62:1803-1807[Medline]. 
      13. Cole, G. A., N. Nathanson, and R. A. Prendergast. 1972. Requirement 
      for thetabearing cells in lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus-induced 
      central nervous system disease. Nature 238:335-337[Medline]. 
      14. Corapi, W. V., C. W. Olsen, and F. W. Scott. 1992. Monoclonal antibody 
      analysis of neutralization and antibody-dependent enhancement of feline 
      infectious peritonitis virus. J. Virol. 66:6695-6705[Abstract]. 
      15. Halstead, S. B. 1988. Pathogenesis of dengue: challenges to molecular 
      biology. Science 239:476-481[Medline]. 
      16. Homsy, J., M. Meyer, T. Tateno, S. Clarkson, and J. A. Levy. 1989. The 
      Fc and not CD4 receptor mediates antibody enhancement of HIV infection in 
      human cells. Science 244:1357-1360[Medline]. 
      17. Hotchin, J. 1962. The biology of lymphocytic choriomeningitis 
      infection: virus induced immune disease. Cold Spring Harbor Symp. Quant. 
      Biol. 27:479-499. 
      18. Kägi, D., B. Ledermann, K. Bürki, P. Seiler, B. Odermatt, K. J. Olsen, 
      E. Podack, R. M. Zinkernagel, and H. Hengartner. 1994. Cytotoxicity 
      mediated by T cells and natural killer cells is greatly impaired in 
      perforin-deficient mice. Nature 369:31-37[Medline]. 
      19. Kimmig, W., and F. Lehmann-Grube. 1979. The immune response of the 
      mouse to lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus. I. Circulating antibodies. J. 
      Gen. Virol. 45:703-710[Abstract]. 
      20. Koup, R. A., J. T. Safrit, Y. Cao, C. A. Andrews, G. McLeod, W. 
      Borkowsky, C. Farthing, and D. D. Ho. 1994. Temporal association of 
      cellular immune responses with the initial control of viremia in primary 
      human immunodeficiency virus type 1 syndrome. J. Virol. 
      68:4650-4655[Abstract]. 
      21. Kurane, I., and F. E. Ennis. 1992. Immunity and immunopathology in 
      dengue virus infections. Semin. Immunol. 4:121-127[Medline]. 
      22. Larsen, J. H. 1969. Development of humoral and cell-mediated immunity 
      to lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus in the mouse. J. Immunol. 
      102:941-946[Medline]. 
      23. Lehmann-Grube, F. 1971. Lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus. Virol. 
      Monogr. 10:1-173. 
      24. Lemon, S. M., and D. L. Thomas. 1997. Vaccines to prevent viral 
      hepatitis. N. Engl. J. Med. 336:196-204[Free Full Text]. 
      25. Lewis, R. M., T. M. Cosgriff, B. Y. Griffin, J. Rhoderick, and P. B. 
      Jahrling. 1988. Immune serum increases arenavirus replication in 
      monocytes. J. Gen. Virol. 69:1735-1739[Abstract]. 
      26. Luescher, I. F., J. A. Loez, B. Malissen, and J. C. Cerottini. 1992. 
      Interaction of antigenic peptides with MHC class I molecules on living 
      cells studied by photoaffinity labeling. J. Immunol. 
      148:1003-1011[Abstract/Free Full Text]. 
      27. Moore, J. P., Y. Cao, D. D. Ho, and R. A. Koup. 1994. Development of 
      the anti-gp120 antibody response during seroconversion to human 
      immunodeficiency virus type 1. J. Virol. 68:5142-5155[Abstract]. 
      28. Moskophidis, D., S. P. Cobbold, H. Waldmann, and F. Lehmann-Grube. 
      1987. Mechanism of recovery from acute virus infection: treatment of 
      lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus-infected mice with monoclonal 
      antibodies reveals that Lyt-2+ T lymphocytes mediate clearance of virus 
      and regulate the antiviral antibody response. J. Virol. 
      61:1867-1874[Medline]. 
      29. Moskophidis, D., F. Lechner, H. P. Pircher, and R. M. Zinkernagel. 
      1993. Virus persistence in acutely infected immunocompetent mice by 
      exhaustion of antiviral cytotoxic effector T cells. Nature 
      362:758-761[Medline]. 
      30. Nemazee, D. A., and K. Bürki. 1989. Clonal deletion of B lymphocytes 
      in a transgenic mouse bearing anti-MHC class I antibody genes. Nature 
      337:562-566[Medline]. 
      31. Ogra, P. L., M. Fishaut, and M. R. Gallagher. 1980. Viral vaccination 
      via the mucosal routes. Rev. Infect. Dis. 2:352-369[Medline]. 
      32. Pircher, H. P., D. Moskophidis, U. Rohrer, K. Bürki, H. Hengartner, 
      and R. M. Zinkernagel. 1990. Viral escape by selection of cytotoxic T 
      cell-resistant virus variants in vivo. Nature 346:629-633[Medline]. 
      33. Planz, O., P. Seiler, H. Hengartner, and R. M. Zinkernagel. 1996. 
      Specific cytotoxic T cells eliminate cells producing neutralizing 
      antibodies. Nature 382:726-728[Medline]. 
      34. Raghavan, M., and P. J. Bjorkman. 1996. Fc receptors and their 
      interactions with immunoglobulins. Annu. Rev. Cell. Dev. Biol. 12:181-220. 
      [Abstract/Free Full Text]
      35. Robert, G. M., M. Brown, and R. C. Gallo. 1985. HTLV-III-neutralizing 
      antibodies in patients with AIDS and AIDS-related complex. Nature 
      316:72-74[Medline]. 
      36. Sabin, A. B. 1981. Paralytic poliomyelitis: old dogmas and new 
      perspectives. Rev. Infect. Dis. 3:543-564[Medline]. 
      37. Schulz, M., P. Aichele, M. Vollenweider, F. W. Bobe, F. Cardinaux, H. 
      Hengartner, and R. M. Zinkernagel. 1989. MHC dependent T cell epitopes of 
      LCMV nucleoprotein and their protective capacity against viral disease. 
      Eur. J. Immunol. 19:1657-1667[Medline]. 
      38. Seiler, P., M.-A. Bründler, C. Zimmerman, D. Weibel, M. Bruns, H. 
      Hengartner, and R. M. Zinkernagel. Induction of protective cytotoxic T 
      cell responses in the presence of high titers of virus-neutralizing 
      antibodies: implications for passive and active immunization. J. Exp. 
      Med., in press. 
      39. Takeda, A., C. U. Tuazon, and F. A. Ennis. 1988. Antibody-enhanced 
      infection by HIV-1 via Fc receptor-mediated entry. Science 
      242:580-583[Medline]. 
      40. Thomsen, A. R., J. Johansen, O. Marker, and J. P. Christensen. 1996. 
      Exhaustion of CTL memory and recrudescence of viremia in lymphocytic 
      choriomeningitis virus-infected MHC class II-deficient mice and B 
      cell-deficient mice. J. Immunol. 157:3074-3080[Abstract]. 
      41. Thomsen, A. R., and O. Marker. 1988. The complementary roles of 
      cellular and humoral immunity in resistance to re-infection with LCM 
      virus. Immunology 65:9-15[Medline]. 
      42. Traunecker, A., W. Luke, and K. Karjalainen. 1988. Soluble CD4 
      molecules neutralize human immunodeficiency virus type 1. Nature 
      331:84-86[Medline]. 
      43. Uher, F., I. Dobronyi, and J. Gergel. 1981. IgM-Fc receptor-mediated 
      phagocytosis of rat macrophages. Immunology 42:419-425[Medline]. 
      44. Webster, R. G., and R. Rott. 1987. Influenza virus A pathogenicity: 
      the pivotal role of hemagglutinin. Cell 50:665-666[Medline]. 
      45. Weiss, R. A., P. R. Clapham, P. R. Cheingsong, A. G. Dalgleish, C. A. 
      Carne, I. Weller, and R. S. Tedder. 1985. Neutralization of human 
      T-lymphotropic virus type III by sera of AIDS and AIDS-risk patients. 
      Nature 316:69-71[Medline]. 
      46. Weiss, R. C., W. J. Dodds, and F. W. Scott. 1981. Antibody-mediated 
      enhancement of disease in feline infectious peritonitis: comparison with 
      dengue hemorrhagic fever. Comp. Immunol. Microbiol. Infect. Dis. 
      4:175-189[Medline]. 
      47. Wright, K. E., and M. J. Buchmeier. 1991. Antiviral antibodies 
      attenuate T-cell-mediated immunopathology following acute lymphocytic 
      choriomeningitis virus infection. J. Virol. 65:3001-3006[Medline]. 
      48. Wright, T. L., and J. Y. N. Lau. 1993. Clinical aspects of hepatitis B 
      virus infection. Lancet 342:1340-1344[Medline]. 
      49. Zinkernagel, R. M. 1996. Immunology taught by viruses. Science 
      271:173-178[Abstract]. 
      50. Zinkernagel, R. M., T. P. Leist, H. Hengartner, and A. Althage. 1985. 
      Susceptibility to lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus isolates correlates 
      directly with early and high cytotoxic T cell activity, as well as with 
      footpad swelling reaction, and all three are regulated by H-2D. J. Exp. 
      Med. 162:2125-2141[Abstract]. 



J Virol, March 1998, p. 2253-2258, Vol. 72, No. 3
0022-538X/98/$04.00+0
Copyright © 1998, American Society for Microbiology. All rights reserved. 

This article has been cited by other articles: 
  Diamond, M. S., Shrestha, B., Marri, A., Mahan, D., Engle, M. (2003). B Cells 
  and Antibody Play Critical Roles in the Immediate Defense of Disseminated 
  Infection by West Nile Encephalitis Virus. J. Virol. 77: 2578-2586 [Abstract] 
  [Full Text]   
  Guidotti, L. G., Chisari, F. V. (2001). NONCYTOLYTIC CONTROL OF VIRAL 
  INFECTIONS BY THE INNATE AND ADAPTIVE IMMUNE RESPONSE. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 19: 
  65-91 [Abstract] [Full Text]   
  Furrer, E., Bilzer, T., Stitz, L., Planz, O. (2001). Neutralizing Antibodies 
  in Persistent Borna Disease Virus Infection: Prophylactic Effect of 
  gp94-Specific Monoclonal Antibodies in Preventing Encephalitis. J. Virol. 75: 
  943-951 [Abstract] [Full Text]   
  Dal Porto, J. M., Haberman, A. M., Shlomchik, M. J., Kelsoe, G. (1998). 
  Antigen Drives Very Low Affinity B Cells to Become Plasmacytes and Enter 
  Germinal Centers. J Immunol 161: 5373-5381 [Abstract] [Full Text]   
  Seiler, P., Senn, B. M., Brundler, M.-A., Zinkernagel, R. M., Hengartner, H., 
  Kalinke, U. (1999). In Vivo Selection of Neutralization-Resistant Virus 
  Variants But No Evidence of B Cell Tolerance in Lymphocytic Choriomeningitis 
  Virus Carrier Mice Expressing a Transgenic Virus-Neutralizing Antibody. J 
  Immunol 162: 4536-4541 [Abstract] [Full Text]   
  Seiler, P., Senn, B. M., Klenerman, P., Kalinke, U., Hengartner, H., 
  Zinkernagel, R. M. (2000). Additive Effect of Neutralizing Antibody and 
  Antiviral Drug Treatment in Preventing Virus Escape and Persistence. J. Virol. 
  74: 5896-5901 [Abstract] [Full Text]   
  Ciurea, A., Klenerman, P., Hunziker, L., Horvath, E., Senn, B. M., Ochsenbein, 
  A. F., Hengartner, H., Zinkernagel, R. M. (2000). Viral persistence in vivo 
  through selection of neutralizing antibody-escape variants. Proc. Natl. Acad. 
  Sci. U. S. A. 97: 2749-2754 [Abstract] [Full Text]   
  Ciurea, A., Klenerman, P., Hunziker, L., Horvath, E., Senn, B. M., Ochsenbein, 
  A. F., Hengartner, H., Zinkernagel, R. M. (2000). Viral persistence in vivo 
  through selection of neutralizing antibody-escape variants. Proc. Natl. Acad. 
  Sci. U. S. A. 97: 2749-2754 [Abstract] [Full Text]   
  Ochsenbein, A. F., Pinschewer, D. D., Odermatt, B., Carroll, M. C., 
  Hengartner, H., Zinkernagel, R. M. (1999). Protective T Cell-independent 
  Antiviral Antibody Responses Are Dependent on Complement. J. Exp. Med. 190: 
  1165-1174 [Abstract] [Full Text]   


             Abstract of this Article () 
             Reprint (PDF) Version of this Article 
             Similar articles found in:
            JVI Online 
            PubMed 
             PubMed Citation 
             This Article has been cited by: 
             Search Medline for articles by:
             Seiler, P. || Hengartner, H. 
             Alert me when: 
            new articles cite this article

             Download to Citation Manager 

      Books from ASM Press





       
    