MCB -- Sadot et al. 21 (20): 6768  
       

             Abstract of this Article () 
             Reprint (PDF) Version of this Article 
             Similar articles found in:
            MCB Online 
            PubMed 
             PubMed Citation 
             This Article has been cited by: 
            other online articles 
             Search Medline for articles by:
             Sadot, E. || Ben-Ze'ev, A. 
             Alert me when: 
            new articles cite this article

             Download to Citation Manager 

      Books from ASM Press

Molecular and Cellular Biology, October 2001, p. 6768-6781, Vol. 21, No. 20
0270-7306/01/$04.00+0   DOI: 10.1128/MCB.21.20.6768-6781.2001
Copyright © 2001, American Society for Microbiology. All rights reserved. 
Down-Regulation of -Catenin by Activated p53 
Einat Sadot, Benjamin Geiger, Moshe Oren, and Avri Ben-Ze'ev* 
Department of Molecular Cell Biology, The Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 
76100, Israel 
Received 6 February 2001/Returned for modification 5 April 2001/Accepted 9 July 
2001 

         ABSTRACT
       Top 
       Abstract 
       Introduction 
       Materials and Methods 
       Results 
       Discussion 
       References 
-Catenin is a cytoplasmic protein that participates in the assembly of cell-cell 
adherens junctions by binding cadherins to the actin cytoskeleton. In addition, 
it is a key component of the Wnt signaling pathway. Activation of this pathway 
triggers the accumulation of -catenin in the nucleus, where it activates the 
transcription of target genes. Abnormal accumulation of -catenin is 
characteristic of various types of cancer and is caused by mutations either in 
the adenomatous polyposis coli protein, which regulates -catenin degradation, or 
in the -catenin molecule itself. Aberrant accumulation of -catenin in tumors is 
often associated with mutational inactivation of the p53 tumor suppressor. Here 
we show that overexpression of wild-type p53, by either transfection or DNA 
damage, down-regulates -catenin in human and mouse cells. This effect was not 
obtained with transcriptionally inactive p53, including a common 
tumor-associated p53 mutant. The reduction in -catenin level was accompanied by 
inhibition of its transactivation potential. The inhibitory effect of p53 on 
-catenin is apparently mediated by the ubiquitin-proteasome system and requires 
an active glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK3). Mutations in the N terminus of 
-catenin which compromise its degradation by the proteasomes, overexpression of 
dominant-negative F--TrCP, or inhibition of GSK activity all rendered -catenin 
resistant to down-regulation by p53. These findings support the notion that 
there will be a selective pressure for the loss of wild-type p53 expression in 
cancers that are driven by excessive accumulation of -catenin. 

         INTRODUCTION
       Top 
       Abstract 
       Introduction 
       Materials and Methods 
       Results 
       Discussion 
       References 
-Catenin plays a dual role in cells as a major structural component of cell-cell 
adherens junctions and as a pivotal signaling molecule in the Wnt pathway, 
transmitting transcriptional cues into the nucleus. In adherens junctions, 
-catenin bridges between cadherin and the actin cytoskeleton through an 
interaction with -catenin (2, 10). Either the nonjunctional pool of -catenin is 
degraded by the ubiquitin-proteasome system or, under certain conditions, 
-catenin enters the nucleus and, together with lymphoid enhancer factor/T-cell 
factor transcription factors (9, 34, 56), activates transcription by providing 
the transactivation domain to this heterodimeric complex (82). The targeting of 
-catenin to the proteasome is achieved primarily through its phosphorylation by 
a multimolecular complex consisting of glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK3), the 
adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) tumor suppressor protein, and axin (38). The 
phosphoserine motif in the N terminus of -catenin (91) is recognized by -TrCP, 
an F-box component of the E3 ubiquitin ligase complex SCFTrCP (29, 41, 46, 71, 
88). Activation of the Wnt/wg signaling pathway leads to inhibition of -catenin 
degradation by decreasing the ability of GSK3 to phosphorylate -catenin. This 
reduces its susceptibility to degradation by the ubiquitin-proteasome system, 
leading to its accumulation (93). 
Studies in recent years have suggested that -catenin is a potent oncogene 
product (64), and its accumulation has been implicated in tumorigenesis in a 
wide variety of human cancers (65, 66, 94). In colorectal cancer (CRC) the 
increase in -catenin level is attributed to mutations in APC, which occur in 
about 80% of such tumors (55, 65). Accumulation of -catenin can also be 
triggered by mutations in the -catenin gene itself, affecting the amino-terminal 
region of the protein that contains the GSK3 phosphorylation sites (57, 70). 
Such mutations are frequent in colon cancers retaining a wild-type (wt) APC gene 
(66) and are also prevalent in melanoma, hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), and a 
variety of other tumors (13, 16, 22-24, 36, 42, 43, 54, 70, 83, 87, 89, 95). 
The mechanism responsible for -catenin-associated tumorigenesis is suggested to 
involve -catenin- and LEF-1/TCF-activated genes, including genes that control 
the cell cycle (such as those for cyclin D1 [73, 80] and c-myc [32]), genes that 
are involved in cell-extracellular matrix interactions (such as those for 
matrilysin [14], fibronectin [26], and WISP-1 [90]), and genes for various 
transcription factors, including Tcf-1 (68), c-jun and fra-1 (48), and PPAR 
(31). The oncogenic role of -catenin is also supported by studies showing that 
introduction of mutant APC, or -catenin, into transgenic mice results in 
enhanced tumor formation (25, 27, 63). 
Another protein which is implicated in many types of cancer is p53. Mutations in 
the p53 gene are found in about 50% of human cancers (reviewed in references 45 
and 61). Under normal conditions, p53 is most probably latent, owing to its 
rapid ubiquitination and proteolytic degradation. Mdm2, an oncoprotein 
possessing E3 ubiquitin ligase activity, plays a major role in this process (5, 
61). A variety of conditions can lead to the rapid stabilization and activation 
of p53. These include damage to DNA or to the mitotic spindle, ribonucleotide 
depletion, hypoxia, heat shock, and exposure to nitric oxide (4, 35, 45, 61). In 
addition, p53 is induced by several oncogenic proteins, such as myc, ras, and 
adenovirus E1A, providing a direct link between oncogenic processes and the 
tumor suppressor action of p53 (reviewed in references 3, 35, 45, and 61). The 
activation of p53 by these proteins relies mainly on ARF, a tumor suppressor 
protein that binds to Mdm2 and suppresses its p53 ubiquitination activity, 
thereby inhibiting p53 degradation (72). Activated p53 can affect the cell 
cycle, apoptosis, senescence, DNA repair, cell differentiation, and angiogenesis 
(35, 76), mostly via its function as a transcription factor that activates a 
number of target genes and by its interaction with a variety of proteins. Some 
of the better-studied p53 target genes are those for p21 (WAF1), which is mainly 
involved in G1 arrest; GADD45 and 14-3-3, which contribute to G2 arrest; and 
BAX, Fas (APO1), PIG3, and KILLER (DR5), which lead to caspase activation and 
apoptosis (12, 18). 
A possible cross talk between p53 and -catenin is suggested by the observation 
that cancers accumulating -catenin (as a result of APC mutations) also exhibit a 
high frequency of p53 mutations, which was first illustrated by the analysis of 
human CRC (40). Direct evidence for a cross talk between -catenin and p53 was 
recently provided by studies demonstrating that excess -catenin can induce an 
accumulation of active p53 (15). This may explain, at least in part, the 
selective pressure for loss of p53 activity in tumors harboring deregulated 
-catenin, such as CRC and HCC. 
To elucidate why retention of functional p53 is disadvantageous to such tumors, 
we studied the effect of p53 on the level and transcriptional activity of 
-catenin. We report here that elevated levels of wt p53 down-regulate -catenin 
in a variety of cell types. This down-regulation depends on the integrity and 
functionality of p53 and is not observed with a common tumor-associated p53 
mutant. Moreover, this effect of p53 is exerted on wt -catenin but not on the 
stable S33Y -catenin mutant, and it is blocked by the proteasome inhibitor 
MG132, a dominant-negative component of the E3 ubiquitin ligase complex F--TrCP, 
and by LiCl, which inhibits GSK3 activity. Furthermore, p53 can lead to a 
decrease in the level of the endogenous wt -catenin in SW480 cells but not in 
that of the S45 -catenin mutant of HCT116 cells. Together with the observations 
of Damalas et al. (15), our findings outline a negative feedback control 
involving -catenin and p53, where excess -catenin induces the accumulation of 
p53, while high p53 levels down-regulate -catenin. Disruption of this feedback 
loop likely affects tumorigenesis driven by deregulated -catenin activity and 
may therefore underlie the high frequency of p53 inactivation observed in CRC, 
HCC, and probably other types of cancer. 

         MATERIALS AND METHODS
       Top 
       Abstract 
       Introduction 
       Materials and Methods 
       Results 
       Discussion 
       References 
Cells and transfections. The HCT116 and SW480 human colon carcinoma cell lines, 
the human H1299 lung adenocarcinoma cell line, and the 293 
adenovirus-transformed human embryo kidney cell line were cultured in Dulbecco's 
modified Eagle's medium supplemented with 10% bovine calf serum (BCS). wt mouse 
embryonal fibroblasts (MEF), p53/ MEF, and double-mutant p53/ Mdm2/ MEF (15) 
were cultured in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium plus 10% BCS, 100 µM 
nonessential amino acid mixture (Biological Industries Israel), and 50 µM 
-mercaptoethanol. WI38 normal human embryonic lung fibroblasts were cultured in 
minimum essential medium with 20% BCS. For transfections, cells were plated to 
form a 50 to 70% confluent culture in a 30-mm-diameter dish. The SW480 and 
HCT116 cell lines were transfected using Lipofectamine (GIBCO BRL), while the 
293 cells were transfected by the calcium phosphate method. The treatment with 
30 mM LiCl in some experiments was overnight, the treatment with 10 µM MG132 was 
for 4 h, and the treatment with 5 µg of doxorubicin (DOX) per ml or 5 µg of 
cisplatin per ml was for periods ranging from 2 to 48 h. 
Plasmids. The following expression plasmids encoding various p53 constructs were 
employed: mouse wt p53 (20), mouse mutant p5313-52 (30), hemagglutinin 
(HA)-tagged human p53 (HA-p53) (50), human wt p53 (7), and the human R175H 
mutant p53 (7, 60). The reporter plasmid containing the cyclin G 
promoter-luciferase (30), the LEF/TCF reporter plasmids TOPFLASH and FOPFLASH 
(82), the F--TrCP-expressing plasmid (71), and the vectors expressing various 
-catenin forms (HA--catenin, HA-S33Y -catenin, and vesicular stomatitis virus 
[VSV]--catenin) (73, 74, 93) were as described previously. 
Protein analysis. Protein levels were monitored by Western blotting. The 
following antibodies were used. Polyclonal anti--catenin and monoclonal 
antivinculin were from Sigma; monoclonal anti--catenin (clone 14c19220) was from 
Transduction Laboratories. The 14c19220 antibody was generated against amino 
acids 571 to 781 and recognizes the caspase-cleaved 65-kDa product of -catenin 
(11, 81). Monoclonal antibodies against p53 included anti-human p53 DO1 (84), 
PAb1801 (8), anti-mouse p53 (which cross-reacts with human p53), and PAb421 
(28). A polyclonal anti-p53 was kindly provided by Varda Rotter, Weizmann 
Institute of Science). Monoclonal anti-HA clone 12CA5 way from Boehringer 
Mannheim), and polyclonal anti-HA Y11 sc-805 was from Santa Cruz Biotechnology. 
Fractionation of proteins into Triton X-100-soluble and -insoluble fractions was 
performed as previously described (71), and equal volumes of lysates from the 
two fractions were analyzed by Western blotting. Western blots were developed 
using the ECL method (Amersham). Autoradiograms were scanned with a GS-700 
imaging densitometer (Bio-Rad Laboratories) using the FotoLook PS 2.07.2 
software. The intensity of the bands was quantitated using the NIH image 1.61 
software. 
Luciferase assay For transactivation assays, 1 µg of luciferase reporter plasmid 
was cotransfected with 2 µg of the -catenin construct and 2 µg of the various 
p53 constructs, as indicated. A -galactosidase-expressing vector was included as 
an internal control for transfection efficiency. After 24 h, the cells were 
lysed and both luciferase and -galactosidase activities were determined with 
enzyme assay kits (Promega). Luminescence was quantitated using a TD-20e 
luminometer (Turner Design) from duplicate plates. The results represent data 
from at least five independent experiments. 
Immunofluorescence microscopy Cells were cultured on glass coverslips, fixed 
with 3% paraformaldehyde in phosphate-buffered saline, and permeabilized with 
0.5% Triton X-100. The coverslips were incubated with the primary antibodies as 
described above. The secondary antibodies were Alexa 488-conjugated goat 
anti-mouse or anti-rabbit immunoglobulin G (Molecular Probes) and Cy3-conjugated 
goat anti-mouse or anti-rabbit immunoglobulin G (Jackson ImmunoResearch 
Laboratories). Images were acquired using the DeltaVision system (Applied 
Precision) equipped with a Zeiss (Oberkochen, Germany) Axiovert 100 microscope 
and a Photometrics (Tucson, Ariz.) 300 series scientific-grade cooled 
charge-coupled device camera (reading 12-bit images), using a 100×, 1.3 
numerical-aperture plan-Neofluar objective (Zeiss). For quantitative image 
processing, the Priism software was employed (37). At least 50 transfected and 
50 nontransfected cells were examined in each experiment. 

         RESULTS
       Top 
       Abstract 
       Introduction 
       Materials and Methods 
       Results 
       Discussion 
       References 
Excess p53 reduces -catenin protein levels Since recent studies have shown that 
excess -catenin can promote the accumulation of p53 (15), we examined the 
possibility that there is a reciprocal relationship between p53 and -catenin. We 
have addressed this question by monitoring the level of endogenous -catenin in 
cells in which p53 was induced by DNA damage. MEF from wt mice (p53+/+) and from 
p53 knockout mice (p53/) were treated for 24 h with 5 µg of DOX per ml, which 
effectively induces p53 stabilization and accumulation (4). DOX treatment 
elicited a strong nuclear p53 accumulation in the p53+/+ MEF (Fig. 1C; compare 
to Fig. 1A). -Catenin was present in the cytoplasm and adherens junctions in 
both p53+/+ and p53/ cells before DOX treatment (Fig. 1B and F), but following 
DOX treatment, adherens junctions were disrupted in both cell types (Fig. 1D and 
H). However, while in p53/ MEF the intensity of -catenin staining remained 
unchanged and the protein was strongly visible in the cytoplasm and at the edges 
of the disrupted junctions (Fig. 1H), in p53+/+ MEF -catenin staining was 
significantly reduced in the majority of cells (Fig. 1D). During the 24 h of DOX 
treatment, no morphological signs of apoptosis were observed in these cells 
(Fig. 1C, D, G, and H and data not shown).To quantify the effect of p53 on 
-catenin levels, cell lysates isolated after 0, 2, 8, 16, and 24 h of DOX 
treatment were immunoblotted with anti--catenin antibody. To distinguish between 
free cytosolic and cytoskeletal or nuclear -catenin, cells were fractionated 
into Triton X-100-soluble and Triton X-insoluble pools (Fig. 2A). In p53+/+ MEF, 
p53 levels peaked at 16 h after DOX treatment and declined at later times (Fig. 
2A). This p53 was largely Triton insoluble, reflecting its nuclear accumulation. 
-Catenin, in both the Triton X-100-soluble and -insoluble fractions, decreased 
considerably after 24 h of DOX treatment (Fig. 2A and A'), while no significant 
decrease in the vinculin level was observed under these conditions (Fig. 2A and 
A'). In contrast, in p53/ MEF neither -catenin nor vinculin levels decreased 
following DOX treatment (Fig. 2B and B'). When p53 expression was induced by 
cisplatin treatment of p53+/+ MEF (Fig. 2C), a comparable decrease in -catenin 
was observed (Fig. 2C'). Cisplatin did not induce a detectable change in 
-catenin levels of p53/ MEF (Fig. 2D and D'). The effect of p53 on -catenin was 
also observed in normal WI38 human embryonic lung fibroblasts (Fig. 2E). p53 was 
strongly induced in these cells after DOX treatment, and its localization 
shifted from the Triton X-100-soluble to the Triton-insoluble fraction, probably 
reflecting its translocation from the cytoplasm to the nucleus. In these cells, 
treatment with DOX for 48 h induced a fivefold reduction in the Triton 
X-100-soluble -catenin (Fig. 2E'), while the Triton X-100-insoluble fraction was 
only moderately affected (Fig. 2E and E'). In contrast, the levels of vinculin 
in the Triton X-100-soluble fraction of these cells did not change significantly 
(Fig. 2E and E'). Immunofluorescence analysis of WI38 cells treated with DOX for 
24 or 48 h revealed intact nuclei and well-spread cells (data not shown), 
implying that the DOX treatment did not induce apoptosis in these cells. 


            View larger version (102K): 
            [in this window] 
            [in a new window]
              FIG. 1.   Effect of DOX-induced p53 expression on -catenin 
            organization and level. MEF cells were plated on coverslips, treated 
            with 5 µg of DOX per ml for 24 h, fixed, and double stained for p53 
            using an anti-mouse p53 polyclonal antibody (A, C, E, and G) and for 
            -catenin (-cat) using a monoclonal anti--catenin antibody (B, D, F, 
            and H). Bar, 10 µm. 






            View larger version (24K): 
            [in this window] 
            [in a new window]
              FIG. 2.   Effect of p53 elevation on -catenin levels in the Triton 
            X-100-soluble and -insoluble fractions of different cell types. 
            Cells were treated with 5 µg of DOX per ml (A and B) or 5 µg of 
            cisplatin per ml (C and D) for the indicated time periods. Proteins 
            were fractionated into Triton X-100-soluble (lanes s) and -insoluble 
            (lanes i) fractions, resolved by sodium dodecyl 
            sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, and subjected to Western 
            blot analysis using the antibodies indicated in the legend to Fig. 1 
            and with an antivinculin (vin) antibody. The intensities of the 
            bands from representative gels of MEF p53+/+ (A and C) and MEF p53/ 
            (B and D) cells were quantified and plotted (A', C', B', and D', 
            respectively). Extracts from WI38 cells (E and E') were blotted with 
            the monoclonal anti--catenin antibody (-cat), vinculin (vin), and a 
            mixture of the anti-human p53 antibodies DO1 and 1801 and analyzed 
            as described for MEF cells. a.u., arbitrary units. 



The ability of excess p53 to reduce -catenin levels was also observed in 293 
cells transfected with a p53 expression plasmid (Fig. 3). Transfection of p53 
into these cells resulted in a major decrease in the level of endogenous Triton 
X-100-soluble -catenin (which is believed to represent the signaling pool of 
-catenin) but not in that of vinculin (Fig. 3A). To determine whether p53 can 
also affect the signaling activity of -catenin, p53 and -catenin were 
cotransfected into 293 cells together with the LEF-1 reporter plasmid TOPFLASH 
(82) or with a variety of control plasmids. The transfected p53 was 
transcriptionally active as seen from its ability to strongly activate the 
p53-responsive cyclin G promoter (Fig. 3B, bars 1 and 2). The cytomegalovirus 
promoter, a target for nonspecific repression by high levels of p53 (78), was 
repressed only slightly under these conditions (Fig. 3B, bars 3 and 4), while 
p53 had no effect on the control FOPFLASH reporter plasmid (Fig. 3B, bars 6 and 
8). In contrast, p53 very strongly suppressed the -catenin-mediated luciferase 
activity driven from the TOPFLASH reporter (Fig. 3B, bars 11 and 12). Analysis 
of protein levels revealed that in these cotransfected 293 cells, p53 caused a 
dramatic reduction in the steady-state -catenin levels (Fig. 3C). In contrast, 
the levels of the closely related HA-plakoglobin protein (94), transduced with 
the same expression vector, were not affected by p53 (Fig. 3C). This specific 
down-regulation of -catenin is likely responsible for the inhibitory effect of 
p53 on -catenin-dependent transcriptional activity. 


            View larger version (31K): 
            [in this window] 
            [in a new window]
              FIG. 3.   Reciprocal effects of p53 and -catenin overexpression on 
            the levels of these proteins and the transcriptional activity of 
            -catenin. (A) p53 or a control empty vector was transfected into 293 
            cells. After 20 h, cells were fractionated into Triton X-100-soluble 
            (lanes s) and -insoluble (lanes i) fractions and subjected to 
            Western blot analysis. The positions of -catenin (-cat), p53, and 
            vinculin (vin) are marked. (B) Transactivation assays with reporter 
            plasmids expressing luciferase under the transcriptional control of 
            different promoters in the presence of p53 and -catenin. Bars 1 and 
            2, cyclin G (CycG) promoter; bars 3 and 4, cytomegalovirus promoter; 
            bars 5 to 8, FOPFLASH; bars 9 to 12, TOPFLASH. Cells were collected 
            20 h after transfection and subjected to luciferase and 
            -galactosidase assays. The standard error is indicated. (C) Effect 
            of transfected p53 on the levels of cotransfected HA--catenin or 
            HA-plakoglobin (PG) blotted with anti-HA antibody. The positions of 
            -catenin, plakoglobin, and p53 are indicated. (D) H1299 cells (which 
            are p53 deficient) were transfected with increasing amounts of 
            HA--catenin (0 to 4 µg) and a constant amount of p53 (100 ng) (lanes 
            1 to 3) or with a constant amount of HA--catenin (4 µg) and 
            increasing amounts of p53 (0 to 600 ng) (lanes 4 to 7). The levels 
            of HA--catenin (-cat) and p53 were determined by Western blot 
            analysis. The endogenous vinculin served as loading control. 



Reciprocal relationship between -catenin and p53 expression. Since in a recent 
study we have shown that excess -catenin can promote the accumulation of 
exogenously introduced p53 in H1299 cells (which lack p53) (15), we wished to 
examine, in the same cellular system, the predicted reciprocal relationship 
between -catenin and p53 expression. The results shown in Fig. 3D clearly 
demonstrate that when a constant level of p53 was cotransfected into H1299 cells 
with increasing levels of -catenin, the increase in the expression of p53 was 
highest when high levels of -catenin were transfected (Fig. 3D, compare lanes 2 
and 3). In contrast, when a constant high level of -catenin was cotransfected 
with increasing amounts of p53, a decrease in the level of -catenin was already 
apparent with the initial low level of p53 (Fig. 3D, lanes 4 and 5), and a 
dramatic reduction in -catenin was seen with the higher concentrations of p53 
(Fig. 3D, lanes 4 to 7). Taken together, these results demonstrate the 
dose-dependent reciprocal relationship between -catenin and p53 expression in 
the same cells and that p53 can reduce the levels and transcriptional activity 
of -catenin, irrespective of whether -catenin is expressed from the endogenous 
gene or from an expression plasmid. 
p53 mutants fail to reduce -catenin levels Next, we examined the ability of 
mutant forms of p53 to down-regulate -catenin. Unlike wt p53, which strongly 
reduced the levels and transcriptional activity of -catenin in 293 cells, the 
mouse p53 deletion mutant p5313-52, which lacks transactivation and Mdm2 binding 
activities (the transactivation domain is only partially deleted but is 
apparently nonfunctional) (Fig. 4A), had no detectable effect on -catenin level 
and transcriptional activity (Fig. 4B and C). Importantly, the cancer-associated 
hot spot human p53 mutant (p53R175H) (7, 60) was also unable to down-regulate 
-catenin (Fig 4D). The presence of Mdm2 was apparently not required for the 
p53-mediated reduction in -catenin level, since in double-mutant MEF (deficient 
in both p53 and Mdm2), transfection of p53 was still capable of efficiently 
decreasing -catenin expression (Fig. 4E). Hence, the integrity and functionality 
of p53 are required for its ability to down-regulate -catenin and are apparently 
independent of Mdm2. 


            View larger version (28K): 
            [in this window] 
            [in a new window]
              FIG. 4.   p53 mutants fail to reduce -catenin (-cat) levels and 
            transactivation capacity. (A) Schematic representation of the 
            p5313-52 mutant. TAD, transactivation domain. (B) Transactivation in 
            293 cells, using the TOPFLASH reporter plasmid transfected either 
            alone (bar 1) or with HA--catenin (bars 2 to 4) in the presence of 
            wt mouse p53 (bar 3) or the mutant 13-52 mouse p53 (bar 4). Cells 
            were harvested 20 h after transfection and subjected to luciferase 
            activity assay. The standard error is indicated. (C) Western blot 
            analysis for -catenin, p53, and p5313-52 in cell lysates from the 
            experiment in panel B. (D) Human wt p53 or a human p53R175H mutant 
            was cotransfected with HA--catenin into 293 cells and subjected to 
            Western blot analysis. (E) p53 can reduce the levels of -catenin in 
            Mdm2-deficient MEF. p53/ Mdm2/ double-mutant MEF were transfected 
            with 5 µg of -catenin plasmid in the presence or absence of 300 ng 
            of p53 plasmid. The level of the transfected (HA-tagged) -catenin 
            was determined by Western blot analysis. The positions of -catenin 
            and p53 are indicated. The asterisks in panels C, D, and E represent 
            a nonspecific band obtained with the anti-HA antibody. 



Involvement of GSK3 and the proteasome system in p53-mediated down-regulation of 
-catenin. The targeting of -catenin to the proteasome is achieved through its 
phosphorylation by GSK3 in a multiprotein complex, followed by its recognition 
by -TrCP, a component of the E3 ubiquitin ligase system (29, 41, 46, 71, 88). To 
examine whether the reduction in -catenin level by p53 requires the activity of 
GSK3, the effect of p53 on -catenin in cells treated with LiCl, which inhibits 
the activity of GSK3 (91), was determined. As shown in Fig. 5A, incubation with 
LiCl blocked the ability of p53 to lower -catenin levels (Fig. 5A, compare lanes 
3 and 4). The effect of p53 on cotransfected -catenin was also blocked in the 
presence of the proteasome inhibitor MG132 (Fig. 5B, lanes 3 and 4), implying 
that p53 promotes the degradation of -catenin through the proteasome system. 
Furthermore, p53 did not reduce the level of the S33Y mutant -catenin, which is 
relatively refractory to phosphorylation by GSK3 and hence to proteasomal 
degradation (21, 29, 46), in either the presence (Fig. 5B, lanes 7 and 8) or in 
the absence (Fig. 5B, lanes 5 and 6) of MG132. When HA-tagged ubiquitin was 
cotransfected with -catenin in the presence or absence of p53, an increase in 
ubiquitinated -catenin was detected in immunoprecipitates obtained from cells 
overexpressing p53 (data not shown). Further support for the notion that p53 
overexpression stimulates -catenin degradation via the classical Wnt pathway was 
obtained from cotransfection of 293 cells with F--TrCP, which binds to 
serine-phosphorylated -catenin and blocks its degradation (71). As shown in Fig. 
5C, expression of F--TrCP partially blocked the p53-induced reduction in 
-catenin levels. These results suggest that p53 can promote the turnover of 
-catenin by augmenting its -TrCP-mediated proteasomal degradation and that 
typical oncogenic mutations of -catenin (such as the S33Y mutation) can render 
it resistant to high levels of p53. 


            View larger version (26K): 
            [in this window] 
            [in a new window]
              FIG. 5.   Blocking of GSK3 activity, polyubiquitination, and 
            proteasomal degradation inhibit the effect of p53 on -catenin 
            (-cat). (A) wt HA--catenin was transfected into 293 cells with p53 
            (lanes 3 and 4) or without p53 (lanes 1 and 2), and half of the 
            cultures were treated overnight with 30 mM LiCl (lanes 2 and 4) 
            before harvesting of the cells and determination of the levels of 
            HA--catenin and p53 by Western blot analysis. (B) wt -catenin (lanes 
            1 to 4) or the HA-S33Y -catenin mutant (lanes 5 to 8) was 
            cotransfected with p53 into 293 cells. After 16 h, MG132 (25 µM) was 
            added to the indicated samples (lanes 3, 4, 7, and 8). The cells 
            were harvested 4 h later and subjected to Western blot analysis. The 
            upper panel shows the levels of -catenin (wt or S33Y mutant). The 
            lower panel shows the transfected p53. (C) VSV-tagged -catenin (1 
            µg) was transfected alone (lane 1) or cotransfected with p53 (1 µg) 
            (lane 2) and increasing concentrations (2 µg [lane 3] and 4 µg [lane 
            4]) of the dominant-negative HA-tagged F--TrCP. The transfected wt 
            -catenin was detected by anti-VSV antibody, while F--TrCP expression 
            was monitored with an anti-HA tag antibody. The asterisk indicates a 
            nonspecific band obtained with the anti-HA antibody. 



p53 can repress wt but not mutant -catenin in colon cancer cell lines. The SW480 
CRC cell line expresses a truncated APC that is deficient in its ability to 
promote -catenin degradation (58). Nevertheless, these cells contain 
phosphorylated -catenin that coprecipitates with the E3 ubiquitin ligase 
component -TrCP (29), suggesting that the proteasomal degradation pathway 
responsible for -catenin turnover is only partially attenuated in these cells. 
The endogenous p53 in SW480 cells has a mutation of Arg to His at position 273 
and another mutation of Pro to Ser at position 309 (1). Transfection of wt p53 
into these cells led to a substantial drop in nuclear -catenin levels (Fig. 6A 
and B). Computerized quantitation of the immunofluorescence images revealed 
about a twofold decrease in nuclear -catenin levels (Fig. 6C) and a fourfold 
reduction in -catenin-mediated transactivation in these cells (Fig. 6D). 


            View larger version (46K): 
            [in this window] 
            [in a new window]
              FIG. 6.   wt p53 down-regulates -catenin in SW480 CRC cells. (A 
            and B) SW480 cells were transfected with HA-p53 (4 µg) and 
            immunostained for HA (A) and -catenin (-cat) (B) 20 h after 
            transfection. The arrows point to the p53-transfected cells. (C) 
            Computerized quantitation of nuclear -catenin in control, 
            nontransfected cells and in p53-transfected cells. (D) 
            Transactivation in SW480 cells cotransfected with p53 and either 
            TOPFLASH or FOPFLASH reporter plasmid. Cells were harvested 20 h 
            after transfection and subjected to luciferase assay and Western 
            blot analysis for the transfected HA-p53. The position of HA-p53 on 
            the Western blot is indicated. Bar, 10 µm. 



The effect of p53 on mutant -catenin was also examined in the HCT116 CRC cell 
line. These cells express mutant -catenin with a deletion of serine 45 (S45) and 
contain wt APC (57) and wt p53 (19). Treatment of HCT116 cells with DOX for 24 h 
led to the nuclear accumulation of p53 (Fig. 7A [compare to Fig. 7C]), but no 
significant change in the -catenin staining pattern or disruption of adherens 
junctions was observed in these cells (Fig. 7B [compare to Fig. 7D]). The 
analysis of the Triton X-100-soluble and -insoluble fractions from these cells 
also failed to reveal a significant change in -catenin levels (Fig. 7E and F). 
Consistent with these observations, transfection of p53 into HCT116 cells also 
had no effect on the levels of the endogenous mutant -catenin (data not shown). 


            View larger version (84K): 
            [in this window] 
            [in a new window]
              FIG. 7.   p53 fails to affect the mutant -catenin S45 of HCT116 
            CRC cells. (A to D) HCT116 cells were cultured on coverslips for 24 
            h in either the presence (A and B) or the absence (C and D) of 5 µg 
            of DOX per ml. After fixation, the cells were double immunostained 
            for p53 using a mixture of DO1 and 1801 antibodies (A and C) and for 
            -catenin (-cat) (B and D) using a polyclonal anti--catenin antibody. 
            Bar, 10 µm. (E) HCT116 cells were treated with 5 µg of DOX per ml 
            for the indicated times and fractionated into Triton X-100-soluble 
            (lanes s) and -insoluble (lanes i) fractions. The lysates were 
            subjected to Western blot analysis. The positions of -catenin, p53, 
            and vinculin (vin) (as a control) are indicated. (F) Quantitative 
            analysis of the intensities of the bands shown in panel E. au, 
            arbitrary units. 



The presence of deregulated mutant -catenin in HCT116 cells results in 
constitutive -catenin-mediated transcriptional activity (Fig. 8A, lane 7). In 
contrast to the case in SW480 cells, excess wt p53 failed to inhibit the 
transcriptional activity of the endogenous mutant (S45) -catenin in HCT116 cells 
(Fig. 8A, lane 8 [compare to lane 7]). However, p53 repressed transactivation 
driven by excess transfected wt -catenin (Fig. 8A, lanes 9 and 10). This 
inhibition was accompanied by a reduction in the level of the transfected wt 
-catenin (Fig. 8A, lanes 9 and 10). In contrast, transfection of the more stable 
tumor-associated mutant -catenin S33Y resulted in augmented transactivation that 
was resistant to wt p53 coexpression (Fig. 8A, lanes 11 and 12). We also 
examined the ability of the endogenous wt p53 in HCT116 cells to affect 
-catenin-mediated transactivation by inducing p53 expression with DOX. The 
results demonstrate that increasing endogenous p53 levels by this approach led 
to the inhibition of transactivation driven by the transfected wt -catenin (Fig. 
8B, compare bars 5 and 10 to bar 4) but not by the mutant endogenous S45 
-catenin or the transfected mutant -catenin S33Y, which were resistant to 
elevated p53 (Fig, 8B, compare bars 4 to 10 and 6 to 12). These results suggest 
that the cellular machinery necessary for the inhibitory effect of p53 on 
-catenin is intact in HCT116 cells and that the inability of wt p53 to 
down-regulate the endogenous -catenin (S45) or the transfected S33Y is due to 
the N-terminal mutations in the serine motifs that regulate -catenin 
degradation. 


            View larger version (25K): 
            [in this window] 
            [in a new window]
              FIG. 8.   p53 does not inhibit transactivation by the S45 -catenin 
            of HCT116 cells and of transfected S33Y but inhibits the activity of 
            wt -catenin in these cells. (A) HCT116 cells were transfected with 
            FOPFLASH (lanes 1 to 5) or TOPFLASH (lanes 7 to 12), together with 
            p53 (lanes 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, and 12), HA--catenin (lanes 3, 4, 9, and 
            10), or p53 and HA-S33Y -catenin (lanes 5, 6, 11, and 12). 
            Luciferase activity was determined 20 h after transfection, and 
            Western blot analyses of the cell lysates for the expression of 
            -catenin (-cat) (wt) and the mutant (S33Y) and for p53 were 
            performed. (B) HCT116 cells were transfected with wt and S33Y 
            -catenin and either treated with DOX (to elevate p53 levels) as 
            described for Fig. 7 (bars 7 to 12) or left untreated (bars 1 to 6). 
            Transactivation driven by the FOPFLASH and TOPFLASH reporter 
            plasmids was determined. The standard error is shown. 



Taken together, the results imply that mutations within the GSK3 phosphorylation 
domain of -catenin that render it more resistant to proteasomal degradation also 
make -catenin more resistant to down-regulation by activated p53. Importantly, 
such -catenin mutations are prevalent in a variety of human cancers. 

         DISCUSSION
       Top 
       Abstract 
       Introduction 
       Materials and Methods 
       Results 
       Discussion 
       References 
This study demonstrated that high levels of functional p53 could down-regulate 
the amount and transcriptional activity of -catenin. This effect was eliminated 
by blocking the activities of components that regulate the turnover of -catenin, 
such as GSK3, a dominant-negative form of -TrCP, and the proteasomal system. p53 
therefore most probably exerted its effect by accelerating the degradation of 
-catenin by the proteasome. While p53 could down-regulate wt -catenin in the 
presence of wt or even mutant APC, it failed to affect mutants of -catenin that 
are resistant to the APC-GSK3-axin-mediated degradation. It is unlikely that the 
basal low levels of p53 in nonstressed cells are sufficient to cause -catenin 
down-regulation. Rather, it is conceivable that this inhibitory effect is 
exerted only by high levels of activated p53, as seen in cells exposed to 
extensive genotoxic stress (Fig. 2). Constitutive activity of -catenin can exert 
both proliferative and antiapoptotic effects (62). Hence, the down-regulation of 
-catenin by activated p53 is likely to contribute to the antiproliferative 
effects of p53 and possibly also facilitates p53-mediated apoptosis. While in 
our experiments p53 activation was attained by treatment of cultured cells with 
DNA-damaging agents, it is conceivable that a similar situation may pertain also 
in emerging colorectal tumors with multiple genomic aberrations, which is 
typical of late stages in colorectal carcinogenesis. 
The exact molecular mechanism responsible for the down-regulation of -catenin by 
p53 remains to be elucidated. So far, we have been unable to demonstrate a 
direct protein-protein interaction between p53 and -catenin (data not shown), 
suggesting that additional proteins are likely to play a role in mediating 
-catenin down-regulation. p53 is a transcription factor, which is capable of 
direct sequence-specific transcription activation and indirect, albeit target 
gene selective, transcriptional repression. We have shown that p53 mutants 
deficient in transcriptional activity, owing either to deletion of the 
transactivation domain (p5313-52) or to a more global conformational change 
affecting both the DNA binding and the transactivation domains (p53R175H), 
failed to reduce -catenin levels. These findings support the view that the 
down-modulation of -catenin depends on the transcriptional activities of p53. 
For example, the decrease in -catenin might be mediated by the action of the 
products of one or several p53 target genes whose expression is induced in cells 
exposed to high levels of activated p53. One interesting possibility is 
suggested by studies showing that APC mRNA is induced by excess p53 in several 
cell types (59). Such induction of APC expression by p53 may contribute to 
enhanced -catenin degradation in cells carrying a functional APC gene and may 
account for part of the observed reduction in -catenin protein following p53 
elevation. This observation cannot, however, explain the ability of p53 to 
reduce -catenin expression in SW480 CRC cells, which harbor a mutant APC gene 
and are devoid of functional APC protein. 
Another potential contributor to the inhibitory effect of p53 on -catenin is the 
Dickkopf protein, whose gene has recently been reported to be subject to 
transcriptional activation by p53 (85). Dickkopf-1 blocks low-density 
lipoprotein (LDL) receptor-related protein 6-mediated Wnt/-catenin signaling by 
directly interacting with LDL receptor-related protein 6 (49). In addition to 
transactivation, transcriptional repression by p53 may also play a role in 
suppressing -catenin. One potential mediator of such an effect may be presenilin 
1, whose expression is repressed by p53 (69). Since presenilin 1 can stabilize 
-catenin (92), its down-regulation by p53 might lead to destabilization of 
-catenin. It is conceivable that additional p53-regulated genes may also play a 
role in the down-regulation of -catenin, and p53 might turn on a coordinated 
transcriptional program designed to inhibit -catenin-mediated signaling. 
While this paper was under revision, two studies were published suggesting that 
Siah-1, a transcriptional target of p53, can down-regulate -catenin. Liu et al. 
(47) and Matsuzawa and Reed (51) reported that a p53-inducible gene 
product(Siah-1) can mediate the down-regulation of -catenin by a novel 
degradation pathway mediated by SIP, Ebi, and the carboxy terminus of APC. This 
novel pathway may provide an additional means by which p53 can inhibit the 
accumulation of -catenin, especially of the oncogenic -catenin mutants with 
mutations in the GSK phosphorylation sites, since this pathway operates 
independently of GSK3 (47). It is of note that whereas overexpression of Siah-1 
in SW480 cells was unable to inhibit -catenin signaling (47), transfection of 
p53 into these cells did cause a marked reduction in the level of nuclear 
-catenin and LEF-dependent transcription (Fig. 6). Taken together, these 
observations imply that p53 can block -catenin signaling through multiple 
downstream effectors, with Siah-1 being just one of those. Minimally, the data 
argue that there are at least two major alternative pathways for p53-induced 
suppression of -catenin: a canonical cascade involving components of the Wnt 
pathway and a second mechanism involving Siah-1, SIP, and Ebi. Both pathways are 
probably turned on simultaneously when p53 levels become sufficiently elevated, 
and they may synergize to achieve a more effective response. This could be 
particularly important when the target is an abundant protein such as -catenin. 
The relative contribution of each of the two pathways to the elimination of 
-catenin signaling probably varies with cell type and cell context and may be 
modulated by additional genetic alterations that occur in the course of 
tumorigenesis. Furthermore, the existence of multiple parallel pathways for 
down-regulating -catenin by activated p53 may provide a fail-safe mechanism in 
case one of the components along either of the pathways becomes inactivated. 
Alternatively, p53 and -catenin may compete for a common interacting molecule 
required for -catenin stabilization. A possible candidate is the p300 (also 
called CBP) transcriptional coactivator, since both p53 and -catenin can bind to 
p300 (6, 33, 79) and a recent study has shown that p53 and -catenin compete for 
p300 binding (53). A similar competition for p300 binding between p53 and NF-B, 
resulting in the inhibition of the transcriptional activity of each of these 
proteins by an excess of the other, has been described (86). Our preliminary 
results indicate that overexpression of p300 can protect wt -catenin from 
down-regulation by p53 (data not shown). It is thus tempting to speculate that 
when p300 is present in limited amounts, increased p53 levels can displace the 
endogenous -catenin from its complex with p300 and render it more susceptible to 
ubiquitination and degradation. 
A simple explanation that needs to be ruled out is that the reduction in 
-catenin protein is merely a consequence of p53-mediated apoptosis. Such a 
possibility may rely on previous observations that -catenin is subject to 
cleavage by caspases, mainly caspases 3, 6, and 8, in cells undergoing apoptosis 
(11, 81). We believe that this is an unlikely explanation for the effects of p53 
on -catenin for several reasons. First, no morphological changes suggestive of 
apoptosis were noted in any of the cell types used in this study when the cells 
were harvested for biochemical and immunohistochemical analysis (Fig. 1, 6, and 
7 and data not shown). In addition, using the same antibody which was employed 
to demonstrate caspase-mediated -catenin cleavage (11, 81), we did not detect 
cleaved forms of -catenin in extracts of cells exposed to high p53 activity 
(Fig. 1A, C, and E and 7E and data not shown). Hence, we suggest that the effect 
of p53 on -catenin most probably is exerted through the pathway responsible for 
the normal proteasomal degradation of -catenin. 
A previous study has shown that excess deregulated -catenin can lead to the 
induction of active p53 (15) and that this is also achieved through changes in 
the rate of proteasomal degradation of the affected protein (p53). In the 
present study, we demonstrate a reciprocal relationship between p53 and -catenin 
in the same cell system by comparing the levels of the two proteins under 
conditions in which one protein was in excess over the other (Fig. 3D). It is 
clear from these results that increasing levels of -catenin augment the levels 
of p53 when a constant amount of p53 is cotransduced into the same cells. On the 
other hand, when high levels of -catenin are transfected, elevation of p53 
results in a specific, dose-dependent down-regulation of -catenin expression 
(Fig. 3D). Taken together, these studies delineate an autoregulatory loop in 
which excess -catenin induces p53 activation, which in turn leads to 
down-regulation of -catenin levels and activity. This control loop might serve 
as an effective means for curbing the potential oncogenic effects of deregulated 
-catenin. Its disruption may unleash the oncogenic activity of -catenin, thereby 
contributing to tumor progression. The disruption of such autoregulation may 
occur through mutations in the p53 gene that will render it unable to repress 
-catenin activity or by inactivation of the tumor suppressor ARF, which 
stabilizes p53 (72). It is noteworthy that the ability to repress -catenin is 
lost in the p53R175H mutant, which is frequently seen in human CRC where 
-catenin is deregulated through the loss of functional APC (39, 60). This loop 
may also be disrupted by mutations in -catenin that render it resistant to the 
inhibitory effect of p53, as is the case with the S33Y -catenin mutant. In this 
regard, it is of interest that while p53 mutations predominate in the major 
class of CRC (involving -catenin deregulation through APC gene inactivation), 
they are significantly less frequent in CRC carrying direct stabilizing 
mutations within -catenin itself (17, 44, 52, 75, 77). Moreover, in a recent 
study employing N-myc transgenic mice, the majority of liver tumors arising on a 
p53+/ background displayed either a -catenin mutation or a loss of the remaining 
p53 allele (67). This further suggests that these two mutational events often 
tend to be mutually exclusive during tumorigenesis. Our findings offer an 
appealing explanation for these observations by predicting that early mutations 
in -catenin will render it refractory to down-regulation by p53, thereby 
significantly reducing the pressure for subsequent mutational inactivation of 
p53. Conversely, the predominance of p53 mutations in the major class of CRC, 
which are associated with APC inactivation, suggests that the ability of wt p53 
to restrain the deregulated wt -catenin is a key component of its tumor 
suppressor function and a major cause for the elimination of p53 function in 
such tumors. 

         ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This study was supported by grants from the German-Israeli Foundation for 
Scientific Research and Development, the Cooperation Program in Cancer Research 
between the German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ) and the Israeli Ministry of 
Science and Arts (IMOSA), CaP CURE, The Israel Science Foundation, The Crown 
Endowment Fund for Immunological Research, The M. D. Moross Institute for Cancer 
Research, NIH (grant RO1 CA-40099), and the German-Israel Project Cooperation 
(DIP). B.G. holds the E. Neter Chair of Cell and Tumor Biology, and A.B.-Z. 
holds the Lunenfeld-Kunin Chair in Genetics and Cell Biology. 
We thank G. Del Sal and J. Zhurinsky for illuminating discussions. 

         FOOTNOTES

* Corresponding author. Mailing address: Department of Molecular Cell Biology, 
The Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 76100, Israel. Phone: (972) 8-934 
2422. Fax: (972) 8-946 5261. E-mail: avri.ben-zeev@weizmann.ac.il. 

         REFERENCES
       Top 
       Abstract 
       Introduction 
       Materials and Methods 
       Results 
       Discussion 
       References 

      1. Abarzua, P., J. E. LoSardo, M. L. Gubler, and A. Neri. 1995. 
      Microinjection of monoclonal antibody PAb421 into human SW480 colorectal 
      carcinoma cells restores the transcription activation function to mutant 
      p53. Cancer Res. 55:3490-3494[Abstract]. 
      2. Adams, C., and W. Nelson. 1998. Cytomechanics of cadherin-mediated 
      cell-cell adhesion. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 10:572-577[CrossRef][Medline]. 
      3. Albrechtsen, N., I. Dornreiter, F. Grosse, E. Kim, L. Wiesmuller, and 
      W. Deppert. 1999. Maintenance of genomic integrity by p53: complementary 
      roles for activated and non-activated p53. Oncogene 
      18:7706-7717[CrossRef][Medline]. 
      4. Ashcroft, M., Y. Taya, and K. H. Vousden. 2000. Stress signals utilize 
      multiple pathways to stabilize p53. Mol. Cell. Biol. 
      20:3224-3233[Abstract/Free Full Text]. 
      5. Ashcroft, M., and K. H. Vousden. 1999. Regulation of p53 stability. 
      Oncogene 18:7637-7643[CrossRef][Medline]. 
      6. Avantaggiati, M. L., V. Ogryzko, K. Gardner, A. Giordano, A. S. Levine, 
      and K. Kelly. 1997. Recruitment of p300/CBP in p53-dependent signal 
      pathways. Cell 89:1175-1184[Medline]. 
      7. Baker, S. J., E. R. Fearon, J. M. Nigro, S. R. Hamilton, A. C. 
      Preisinger, J. M. Jessup, P. vanTuinen, D. H. Ledbetter, D. F. Barker, Y. 
      Nakamura, R. White, and B. Vogelstein. 1989. Chromosome 17 deletions and 
      p53 gene mutations in colorectal carcinomas. Science 244:217-221[Medline]. 

      8. Banks, L., G. Matlashewski, and L. Crawford. 1986. Isolation of 
      human-p53-specific monoclonal antibodies and their use in the studies of 
      human p53 expression. Eur. J. Biochem. 159:529-534[Abstract]. 
      9. Behrens, J., J. von Kries, M. Kuhl, L. Bruhn, D. Wedlich, R. 
      Grosschedl, and W. Birchmeier. 1996. Functional interaction of 
      beta-catenin with the transcription factor LEF-1. Nature 
      382:638-642[Medline]. 
      10. Ben-Ze'ev, A., and B. Geiger. 1998. Differential molecular 
      interactions of beta-catenin and plakoglobin in adhesion, signaling and 
      cancer. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 10:629-639[CrossRef][Medline]. 
      11. Brancolini, C., D. Lazarevic, J. Rodriguez, and C. Schneider. 1997. 
      Dismantling cell-cell contacts during apoptosis is coupled to a 
      caspase-dependent proteolytic cleavage of beta-catenin. J. Cell. Biol. 
      139:759-771[Abstract/Free Full Text]. 
      12. Burns, T. F., and W. S. El-Deiry. 1999. The p53 pathway and apoptosis. 
      J. Cell. Physiol. 181:231-239[CrossRef][Medline]. 
      13. Chan, E., U. Gat, J. McNiff, and E. Fuchs. 1999. A common human skin 
      tumour is caused by activating mutations in beta-catenin. Nat. Genet. 
      21:410-413[CrossRef][Medline]. 
      14. Crawford, H., B. Fingleton, L. Rudolph-Owen, K. Goss, B. Rubinfeld, P. 
      Polakis, and L. Matrisian. 1999. The metalloproteinase matrilysin is a 
      target of beta-catenin transactivation in intestinal tumors. Oncogene 
      18:2883-2891[CrossRef][Medline]. 
      15. Damalas, A., A. Ben-Ze'ev, I. Simcha, M. Shtutman, J. Leal, J. 
      Zhurinsky, B. Geiger, and M. Oren. 1999. Excess -catenin promotes 
      accumulation of transcriptionally active p53. EMBO J. 
      18:3054-3063[Abstract/Free Full Text]. 
      16. de La Coste, A., B. Romagnolo, P. Billuart, C. A. Renard, M. A. 
      Buendia, O. Soubrane, M. Fabre, J. Chelly, C. Beldjord, A. Kahn, and C. 
      Perret. 1998. Somatic mutations of the beta-catenin gene are frequent in 
      mouse and human hepatocellular carcinomas. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 
      95:8847-8851[Abstract/Free Full Text]. 
      17. Delattre, O., S. Olschwang, D. J. Law, T. Melot, Y. Remvikos, R. J. 
      Salmon, X. Sastre, P. Validire, A. P. Feinberg, and G. Thomas. 1989. 
      Multiple genetic alterations in distal and proximal colorectal cancer. 
      Lancet 2:353-356[Medline]. 
      18. el-Deiry, W. S. 1998. Regulation of p53 downstream genes. Semin. 
      Cancer Biol. 8:345-357[CrossRef][Medline]. 
      19. el-Deiry, W. S., J. W. Harper, P. M. O'Connor, V. E. Velculescu, C. E. 
      Canman, J. Jackman, J. A. Pietenpol, M. Burrell, D. E. Hill, Y. Wang, et 
      al. 1994. WAF1/CIP1 is induced in p53-mediated G1 arrest and apoptosis. 
      Cancer Res. 54:1169-1174[Abstract]. 
      20. Eliyahu, D., D. Michalovitz, S. Eliyahu, O. Pinhasi-Kimhi, and M. 
      Oren. 1989. Wild-type p53 can inhibit oncogene-mediated focus formation. 
      Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 86:8763-8767[Medline]. 
      21. Fuchs, S. Y., A. Chen, Y. Xiong, Z. Q. Pan, and Z. Ronai. 1999. HOS, a 
      human homolog of Slimb, forms an SCF complex with Skp1 and Cullin1 and 
      targets the phosphorylation-dependent degradation of IkappaB and 
      beta-catenin. Oncogene 18:2039-2046[CrossRef][Medline]. 
      22. Fukuchi, T., M. Sakamoto, H. Tsuda, K. Maruyama, S. Nozawa, and S. 
      Hirohashi. 1998. Beta-catenin mutation in carcinoma of the uterine 
      endometrium. Cancer Res. 58:3526-3528[Abstract]. 
      23. Gamallo, C., J. Palacios, G. Moreno, J. Calvo de Mora, A. Suarez, and 
      A. Armas. 1999. Beta-catenin expression pattern in stage I and II ovarian 
      carcinomas: relationship with beta-catenin gene mutations, 
      clinicopathological features, and clinical outcome. Am. J. Pathol. 
      155:527-536[Abstract/Free Full Text]. 
      24. Garcia-Rostan, G., G. Tallini, A. Herrero, T. G. D'Aquila, M. L. 
      Carcangiu, and D. L. Rimm. 1999. Frequent mutation and nuclear 
      localization of beta-catenin in anaplastic thyroid carcinoma. Cancer Res. 
      59:1811-1815[Abstract/Free Full Text]. 
      25. Gat, U., R. DasGupta, L. Degenstein, and E. Fuchs. 1998. De novo hair 
      follicle morphogenesis and hair tumors in mice expressing a truncated 
      beta-catenin in skin. Cell 95:605-614[Medline]. 
      26. Gradl, D., M. Kuhl, and D. Wedlich. 1999. The Wnt/Wg signal transducer 
      beta-catenin controls fibronectin expression. Mol. Cell. Biol. 
      19:5576-5587[Abstract/Free Full Text]. 
      27. Harada, N., Y. Tamai, T. Ishikawa, B. Sauer, K. Takaku, M. Oshima, and 
      M. M. Taketo. 1999. Intestinal polyposis in mice with a dominant stable 
      mutation of the beta-catenin gene. EMBO J. 18:5931-5942[Abstract/Free Full 
      Text]. 
      28. Harlow, E. D., L. V. Crawford, D. C. Pim, and N. M. Williamson. 1981. 
      Monoclonal antibodies specific for simian virus 40 tumor antigens. J. 
      Virol. 39:861-869[Medline]. 
      29. Hart, M., J. Concordet, I. Lassot, I. Albert, R. del los Santos, H. 
      Durand, C. Perret, B. Rubinfeld, F. Margottin, R. Benarous, and P. 
      Polakis. 1999. The F-box protein beta-TrCP associates with phosphorylated 
      beta-catenin and regulates its activity in the cell. Curr. Biol. 
      9:207-210[CrossRef][Medline]. 
      30. Haupt, Y., Y. Barak, and M. Oren. 1996. Cell type-specific inhibition 
      of p53-mediated apoptosis by mdm2. EMBO J. 15:1596-1606[Abstract]. 
      31. He, T., T. Chan, B. Vogelstein, and K. Kinzler. 1999. PPARdelta is an 
      APC-regulated target of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. Cell 
      99:335-345[Medline]. 
      32. He, T., A. Sparks, C. Rago, H. Hermeking, L. Zawel, L. da Costa, P. 
      Morin, B. Vogelstein, and K. Kinzler. 1998. Identification of c-MYC as a 
      target of the APC pathway. Science 281:1509-1512[Abstract/Free Full Text]. 

      33. Hecht, A., K. Vleminckx, M. Stemmler, F. van Roy, and R. Kemler. 2000. 
      The p300/CBP acetyltransferases function as transcriptional coactivators 
      of beta-catenin in vertebrates. EMBO J. 19:1839-1850[Abstract/Free Full 
      Text]. 
      34. Huber, O., R. Korn, J. McLaughlin, M. Ohsugi, B. Herrmann, and R. 
      Kemler. 1996. Nuclear localization of beta-catenin by interaction with 
      transcription factor LEF-1. Mech. Dev. 59:3-10[CrossRef][Medline]. 
      35. Janus, F., N. Albrechtsen, I. Dornreiter, L. Wiesmuller, F. Grosse, 
      and W. Deppert. 1999. The dual role model for p53 in maintaining genomic 
      integrity. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 55:12-27[CrossRef][Medline]. 
      36. Jeng, Y. M., M. Z. Wu, T. L. Mao, M. H. Chang, and H. C. Hsu. 2000. 
      Somatic mutations of beta-catenin play a crucial role in the tumorigenesis 
      of sporadic hepatoblastoma. Cancer Lett. 152:45-51[CrossRef][Medline]. 
      37. Kam, Z., M. Jones, O. H. Chen, D. Agad, and J. W. Sedat. 1993. Design 
      and construction of an optimal illumination system for quantitative 
      wide-field multi-dimensional microscopy. Bioimaging 1:71-81[CrossRef]. 
      38. Kikuchi, A. 2000. Regulation of beta-catenin signaling in the Wnt 
      pathway. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 268:243-248[CrossRef][Medline]. 
      39. Kikuchi-Yanoshita, R., M. Konishi, S. Ito, M. Seki, K. Tanaka, Y. 
      Maeda, H. Iino, M. Fukayama, M. T. Koike. Mori, et al. 1992. Genetic 
      changes of both p53 alleles associated with the conversion from colorectal 
      adenoma to early carcinoma in familial adenomatous polyposis and 
      non-familial adenomatous polyposis patients. Cancer Res. 
      52:3965-3971[Abstract]. 
      40. Kinzler, K. W., and B. Vogelstein. 1996. Lessons from hereditary 
      colorectal cancer. Cell 87:159-170[Medline]. 
      41. Kitagawa, M., S. Hatakeyama, M. Shirane, M. Matsumoto, N. Ishida, K. 
      Hattori, I. Nakamichi, A. Kikuchi, K. Nakayama, and K. Nakayama. 1999. An 
      F-box protein, FWD1, mediates ubiquitin-dependent proteolysis of 
      beta-catenin. EMBO J. 18:2401-2410[Abstract/Free Full Text]. 
      42. Koch, A., D. Denkhaus, S. Albrecht, I. Leuschner, D. von Schweinitz, 
      and T. Pietsch. 1999. Childhood hepatoblastomas frequently carry a mutated 
      degradation targeting box of the beta-catenin gene. Cancer Res. 
      59:269-273[Abstract/Free Full Text]. 
      43. Koesters, R., R. Ridder, A. Kopp-Schneider, D. Betts, V. Adams, F. 
      Niggli, J. Briner, and M. von Knebel Doeberitz. 1999. Mutational 
      activation of the beta-catenin proto-oncogene is a common event in the 
      development of Wilms' tumors. Cancer Res. 59:3880-3882[Abstract/Free Full 
      Text]. 
      44. Laurent-Puig, P., H. Blons, and P. H. Cugnenc. 1999. Sequence of 
      molecular genetic events in colorectal tumorigenesis. Eur. J. Cancer Prev. 
      9(Suppl. 1):S39-S47. 
      45. Levine, A. J. 1997. p53, the cellular gatekeeper for growth and 
      division. Cell 88:323-331[Medline]. 
      46. Liu, C., Y. Kato, Z. Zhang, V. Do, B. Yankner, and X. He. 1999. 
      Beta-Trcp couples beta-catenin phosphorylation-degradation and regulates 
      Xenopus axis formation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 
      96:6273-6278[Abstract/Free Full Text]. 
      47. Liu, J., J. Stevens, C. Rote, H. Yost, Y. Hu, K. Neufeld, R. White, 
      and N. Matsunami. 2001. Siah-1 mediates a novel beta-catenin degradation 
      pathway linking p53 to the adenomatous polyposis coli protein. Mol. Cell 
      7:927-936[CrossRef][Medline]. 
      48. Mann, B., M. Gelos, A. Siedow, M. Hanski, A. Gratchev, M. Ilyas, W. 
      Bodmer, M. Moyer, E. Riecken, and H. Buhr. 1999. Target genes of 
      beta-catenin-T cell-factor/lymphoid-enhancer-factor signaling in human 
      colorectal carcinomas. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 
      96:1603-1608[Abstract/Free Full Text]. 
      49. Mao, B., W. Wu, Y. Li, D. Hoppe, P. Stannek, A. Glinka, and C. Niehrs. 
      2001. LDL-receptor-related protein 6 is a receptor for Dickkopf proteins. 
      Nature 411:321-325[CrossRef][Medline]. 
      50. Marin, M. C., C. A. Jost, M. S. Irwin, J. A. DeCaprio, D. Caput, and 
      W. G. Kaelin, Jr. 1998. Viral oncoproteins discriminate between p53 and 
      the p53 homolog p73. Mol. Cell. Biol. 18:6316-6324[Abstract/Free Full 
      Text]. 
      51. Matsuzawa, S.-I., and J. Reed. 2001. Siah-1, SIP, and Ebi collaborate 
      in a novel pathway for beta-catenin degradation linked to p53 responses. 
      Mol. Cell 7:915-926[CrossRef][Medline]. 
      52. Mirabelli-Primdahl, L., R. Gryfe, H. Kim, A. Millar, C. Luceri, D. 
      Dale, E. Holowaty, B. Bapat, S. Gallinger, and M. Redston. 1999. 
      Beta-catenin mutations are specific for colorectal carcinomas with 
      microsatellite instability but occur in endometrial carcinomas 
      irrespective of mutator pathway. Cancer Res. 59:3346-3351[Abstract/Free 
      Full Text]. 
      53. Miyagishi, M., R. Fujii, M. Hatta, E. Yoshida, N. Araya, A. Nagafuchi, 
      S. Ishihara, T. Nakajima, and A. Fukamizu. 2000. Regulation of 
      lef-mediated transcription and p53-dependent pathway by associating 
      beta-catenin with CBP/p300. J. Biol. Chem. 275:35170-35175[Abstract/Free 
      Full Text]. 
      54. Miyoshi, Y., K. Iwao, G. Nawa, H. Yoshikawa, T. Ochi, and Y. Nakamura. 
      1998. Frequent mutations in the beta-catenin gene in desmoid tumors from 
      patients without familial adenomatous polyposis. Oncol. Res. 
      10:591-594[Medline]. 
      55. Miyoshi, Y., H. Nagase, H. Ando, A. Horii, S. Ichii, S. Nakatsuru, T. 
      Aoki, Y. Miki, T. Mori, and Y. Nakamura. 1992. Somatic mutations of the 
      APC gene in colorectal tumors: mutation cluster region in the APC gene. 
      Hum. Mol. Genet. 1:229-233[Abstract]. 
      56. Molenaar, M., M. van de Wetering, M. Oosterwegel, J. Peterson-Maduro, 
      S. Godsave, V. Korinek, J. Roose, O. Destree, and H. Clevers. 1996. XTcf-3 
      transcription factor mediates beta-catenin-induced axis formation in 
      Xenopus embryos. Cell 86:391-399[Medline]. 
      57. Morin, P., A. Sparks, V. Korinek, N. Barker, H. Clevers, B. 
      Vogelstein, and K. Kinzler. 1997. Activation of beta-catenin-Tcf signaling 
      in colon cancer by mutations in beta-catenin or APC. Science 
      275:1787-1790[Abstract/Free Full Text]. 
      58. Munemitsu, S., I. Albert, B. Souza, B. Rubinfeld, and P. Polakis. 
      1995. Regulation of intracellular beta-catenin levels by the adenomatous 
      polyposis coli (APC) tumor-suppressor protein. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 
      92:3046-3050[Abstract]. 
      59. Narayan, S., and A. S. Jaiswal. 1997. Activation of adenomatous 
      polyposis coli (APC) gene expression by the DNA-alkylating agent 
      N-methyl-N'-nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine requires p53. J. Biol. Chem. 
      272:30619-30622[Abstract/Free Full Text]. 
      60. Nigro, J. M., S. J. Baker, A. C. Preisinger, J. M. Jessup, R. 
      Hostetter, K. Cleary, S. H. Bigner, N. Davidson, S. Baylin, P. Devilee, T. 
      Glover, F. S. Collins, A. Weston, R. Modali, C. C. Harris, and B. 
      Vogelstein. 1989. Mutations in the p53 gene occur in diverse human tumour 
      types. Nature 342:705-708[Medline]. 
      61. Oren, M. 1999. Regulation of the p53 tumor suppressor protein. J. 
      Biol. Chem. 274:36031-36034[Free Full Text]. 
      62. Orford, K., C. Orford, and S. Byers. 1999. Exogenous expression of 
      beta-catenin regulates contact inhibition, anchorage independent growth, 
      anoikis, and radiation-induced cell cycle arrest. J. Cell Biol. 
      146:855-867[Abstract/Free Full Text]. 
      63. Oshima, M., H. Oshima, K. Kitagawa, M. Kobayashi, C. Itakura, and M. 
      Taketo. 1995. Loss of Apc heterozygosity and abnormal tissue building in 
      nascent intestinal polyps in mice carrying a truncated Apc gene. Proc. 
      Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 92:4482-4486[Abstract]. 
      64. Peifer, M. 1997. Beta-catenin as oncogene: the smoking gun. Science 
      275:1752-1753[Free Full Text]. 
      65. Polakis, P. 1999. The oncogenic activation of beta-catenin. Curr. 
      Opin. Genet. Dev. 9:15-21[CrossRef][Medline]. 
      66. Polakis, P. 2000. Wnt signaling and cancer. Genes Dev. 
      14:1837-1851[Free Full Text]. 
      67. Renard, C. A., G. Fourel, M. P. Bralet, C. Degott, A. De La Coste, C. 
      Perret, P. Tiollais, and M. A. Buendia. 2000. Hepatocellular carcinoma in 
      WHV/N-myc2 transgenic mice: oncogenic mutations of beta-catenin and 
      synergistic effect of p53 null alleles. Oncogene 
      19:2678-2686[CrossRef][Medline]. 
      68. Roose, J., and H. Clevers. 1999. TCF transcription factors: molecular 
      switches in carcinogenesis. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 
      1424:M23-M37[CrossRef][Medline]. 
      69. Roperch, J. P., V. Alvaro, S. Prieur, M. Tuynder, M. Nemani, F. 
      Lethrosne, L. Piouffre, M. C. Gendron, D. Israeli, J. Dausset, M. Oren, R. 
      Amson, and A. Telerman. 1998. Inhibition of presenilin 1 expression is 
      promoted by p53 and p21WAF-1 and results in apoptosis and tumor 
      suppression. Nat. Med. 4:835-838[Medline]. 
      70. Rubinfeld, B., P. Robbins, M. El-Gamil, I. Albert, E. Porfiri, and P. 
      Polakis. 1997. Stabilization of beta-catenin by genetic defects in 
      melanoma cell lines. Science 275:1790-1792[Abstract/Free Full Text]. 
      71. Sadot, E., I. Simcha, K. Iwai, A. Ciechanover, B. Geiger, and A. 
      Ben-Ze'ev. 2000. Differential interaction of plakoglobin and beta-catenin 
      with the ubiquitin-proteasome system. Oncogene 
      19:1992-2001[CrossRef][Medline]. 
      72. Sherr, C. J., and J. D. Weber. 2000. The ARF/p53 pathway. Curr. Opin. 
      Genet. Dev. 10:94-99[CrossRef][Medline]. 
      73. Shtutman, M., J. Zhurinsky, I. Simcha, C. Albanese, M. D'Amico, R. 
      Pestell, and A. Ben-Ze'ev. 1999. The cyclin D1 gene is a target of the 
      beta-catenin/LEF-1 pathway. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 
      96:5522-5527[Abstract/Free Full Text]. 
      74. Simcha, I., M. Shtutman, D. Salomon, J. Zhurinsky, E. Sadot, B. 
      Geiger, and A. Ben-Ze'ev. 1998. Differential nuclear translocation and 
      transactivation potential of beta-catenin and plakoglobin. J. Cell Biol. 
      141:1433-1448[Abstract/Free Full Text]. 
      75. Simms, L. A., G. Radford-Smith, K. G. Biden, R. Buttenshaw, M. 
      Cummings, J. R. Jass, J. Young, S. J. Meltzer, and B. A. Leggett. 1998. 
      Reciprocal relationship between the tumor suppressors p53 and BAX in 
      primary colorectal cancers. Oncogene 17:2003-2008[CrossRef][Medline]. 
      76. Sionov, R. V., and Y. Haupt. 1999. The cellular response to p53: the 
      decision between life and death. Oncogene 18:6145-6157[CrossRef][Medline]. 

      77. Sparks, A., P. Morin, B. Vogelstein, and K. Kinzler. 1998. Mutational 
      analysis of the APC/beta-catenin/Tcf pathway in colorectal cancer. Cancer 
      Res. 58:1130-1134[Abstract]. 
      78. Subler, M. A., D. W. Martin, and S. Deb. 1992. Inhibition of viral and 
      cellular promoters by human wild-type p53. J. Virol. 
      66:4757-4762[Abstract]. 
      79. Takemaru, K., and R. Moon. 2000. The transcriptional coactivator CBP 
      interacts with beta-catenin to activate gene expression. J. Cell Biol. 
      149:249-254[Abstract/Free Full Text]. 
      80. Tetsu, O., and F. McCormick. 1999. Beta-catenin regulates expression 
      of cyclin D1 in colon carcinoma cells. Nature 
      398:422-426[CrossRef][Medline]. 
      81. Van de Craen, M., G. Berx, I. Van den Brande, W. Fiers, W. Declercq, 
      and P. Vandenabeele. 1999. Proteolytic cleavage of beta-catenin by 
      caspases: an in vitro analysis. FEBS Lett. 458:167-170[CrossRef][Medline]. 

      82. van de Wetering, M., R. Cavallo, D. Dooijes, M. van Beest, J. van Es, 
      J. Loureiro, A. Ypma, D. Hursh, T. Jones, A. Bejsovec, M. Peifer, M. 
      Mortin, and H. Clevers. 1997. Armadillo coactivates transcription driven 
      by the product of the Drosophila segment polarity gene dTCF. Cell 
      88:789-799[Medline]. 
      83. Voeller, H., C. Truica, and E. Gelmann. 1998. Beta-catenin mutations 
      in human prostate cancer. Cancer Res. 58:2520-2523[Abstract]. 
      84. Vojtesek, B., J. Bartek, C. A. Midgley, and D. P. Lane. 1992. An 
      immunochemical analysis of the human nuclear phosphoprotein p53. New 
      monoclonal antibodies and epitope mapping using recombinant p53. J. 
      Immunol. Methods 151:237-244[Medline]. 
      85. Wang, J., J. Shou, and X. Chen. 2000. Dickkopf-1, an inhibitor of the 
      Wnt signaling pathway, is induced by p53. Oncogene 
      19:1843-1848[CrossRef][Medline]. 
      86. Webster, G. A., and N. D. Perkins. 1999. Transcriptional cross talk 
      between NF-kappaB and p53. Mol. Cell. Biol. 19:3485-3495[Abstract/Free 
      Full Text]. 
      87. Wei, Y., M. Fabre, S. Branchereau, F. Gauthier, G. Perilongo, and M. 
      A. Buendia. 2000. Activation of beta-catenin in epithelial and mesenchymal 
      hepatoblastomas. Oncogene 19:498-504[CrossRef][Medline]. 
      88. Winston, J., P. Strack, P. Beer-Romero, C. Chu, S. Elledge, and J. 
      Harper. 1999. The SCFbeta-TRCP-ubiquitin ligase complex associates 
      specifically with phosphorylated destruction motifs in IkappaBalpha and 
      beta-catenin and stimulates IkappaBalpha ubiquitination in vitro. Genes 
      Dev. 13:270-283[Abstract/Free Full Text]. 
      89. Wright, K., P. Wilson, S. Morland, I. Campbell, M. Walsh, T. Hurst, B. 
      Ward, M. Cummings, and G. Chenevix-Trench. 1999. Beta-catenin mutation and 
      expression analysis in ovarian cancer: exon 3 mutations and nuclear 
      translocation in 16% of endometrioid tumours. Int. J. Cancer 
      82:625-629[CrossRef][Medline]. 
      90. Xu, L., R. B. Corcoran, J. W. Welsh, D. Pennica, and A. J. Levine. 
      2000. WISP-1 is a Wnt-1- and beta-catenin-responsive oncogene. Genes Dev. 
      14:585-595[Abstract/Free Full Text]. 
      91. Yost, C., M. Torres, J. Miller, E. Huang, D. Kimelman, and R. Moon. 
      1996. The axis-inducing activity, stability, and subcellular distribution 
      of beta-catenin is regulated in Xenopus embryos by glycogen synthase 
      kinase 3. Genes Dev. 10:1443-1454[Abstract]. 
      92. Zhang, Z., H. Hartmann, V. Do, D. Abramowski, C. Sturchler-Pierrat, M. 
      Staufenbiel, B. Sommer, M. van de Wetering, H. Clevers, P. Saftig, B. De 
      Strooper, X. He, and B. Yankner. 1998. Destabilization of beta-catenin by 
      mutations in presenilin-1 potentiates neuronal apoptosis. Nature 
      395:698-702[CrossRef][Medline]. 
      93. Zhurinsky, J., M. Shtutman, and A. Ben-Ze'ev. 2000. Differential 
      mechanisms of LEF/TCF family-dependent transcriptional activation by 
      beta-catenin and plakoglobin. Mol. Cell. Biol. 20:4238-4252[Abstract/Free 
      Full Text]. 
      94. Zhurinsky, J., M. Shtutman, and A. Ben-Ze'ev. 2000. Plakoglobin and 
      -catenin: protein interactions, regulation and biological roles. J. Cell 
      Sci. 113:3127-3139[Abstract/Free Full Text]. 
      95. Zurawel, R., S. Chiappa, C. Allen, and C. Raffel. 1998. Sporadic 
      medulloblastomas contain oncogenic beta-catenin mutations. Cancer Res. 
      58:896-899[Abstract]. 



Molecular and Cellular Biology, October 2001, p. 6768-6781, Vol. 21, No. 20
0270-7306/01/$04.00+0   DOI: 10.1128/MCB.21.20.6768-6781.2001
Copyright © 2001, American Society for Microbiology. All rights reserved. 

This article has been cited by other articles: 
  Chowdhury, I. H., Radonovich, M., Mahieux, R., Pise-Masison, C., Muralidhar, 
  S., Brady, J. N. (2003). p53 facilitates degradation of human T-cell leukaemia 
  virus type I Tax-binding protein through a proteasome-dependent pathway. J Gen 
  Virol 84: 897-906 [Abstract] [Full Text]   
  OREN, M., DAMALAS, A., GOTTLIEB, T., MICHAEL, D., TAPLICK, J., LEAL, J. F. M., 
  MAYA, R., MOAS, M., SEGER, R., TAYA, Y., BEN-ZE'EV, A. (2002). Regulation of 
  p53: Intricate Loops and Delicate Balances. Annals NYAS Online 973: 374-383 
  [Abstract] [Full Text]   
  Kotsinas, A., Evangelou, K., Zacharatos, P., Kittas, C., Gorgoulis, V. G. 
  (2002). Proliferation, but Not Apoptosis, Is Associated with Distinct 
  {beta}-Catenin Expression Patterns in Non-Small-Cell Lung Carcinomas : 
  Relationship with Adenomatous Polyposis Coli and G1-to S-Phase Cell-Cycle 
  Regulators. Am J Pathol 161: 1619-1634 [Abstract] [Full Text]   
  Shtutman, M., Zhurinsky, J., Oren, M., Levina, E., Ben-Ze'ev, A. (2002). PML 
  Is a Target Gene of {beta}-Catenin and Plakoglobin, and Coactivates 
  {beta}-Catenin-mediated Transcription. Cancer Res 62: 5947-5954 [Abstract] 
  [Full Text]   
  Watcharasit, P., Bijur, G. N., Zmijewski, J. W., Song, L., Zmijewska, A., 
  Chen, X., Johnson, G. V. W., Jope, R. S. (2002). Direct, activating 
  interaction between glycogen synthase kinase-3beta and p53 after DNA damage. 
  Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 99: 7951-7955 [Abstract] [Full Text]   
  You, Z., Saims, D., Chen, S., Zhang, Z., Guttridge, D. C., Guan, K.-l., 
  MacDougald, O. A., Brown, A. M.C., Evan, G., Kitajewski, J., Wang, C.-Y. 
  (2002). Wnt signaling promotes oncogenic transformation by inhibiting 
  c-Myc-induced apoptosis. J. Cell Biol. 157: 429-440 [Abstract] [Full Text]   
  Conacci-Sorrell, M., Zhurinsky, J., Ben-Ze'ev, A. (2002). The cadherin-catenin 
  adhesion system in signaling and cancer. J. Clin. Invest. 109: 987-991 [Full 
  Text]   


             Abstract of this Article () 
             Reprint (PDF) Version of this Article 
             Similar articles found in:
            MCB Online 
            PubMed 
             PubMed Citation 
             This Article has been cited by: 
             Search Medline for articles by:
             Sadot, E. || Ben-Ze'ev, A. 
             Alert me when: 
            new articles cite this article

             Download to Citation Manager 

      Books from ASM Press





       
      J. Bacteriol.J. Virol.Eukaryot. Cell
      Microbio. Mol. Bio. ReviewAll ASM Journals

