EMBOJ -- Marambaud et al. 21 (8): 1948 
       


             Abstract of this Article () 
             Reprint (PDF) Version of this Article 
             Similar articles found in:
            EMBO Journal Online 
            PubMed 
             PubMed Citation 
             This Article has been cited by: 
            other online articles 
             Search Medline for articles by:
             Marambaud, P. || Robakis, N. K. 
             Alert me when: 
            new articles cite this article

             Download to Citation Manager 

The EMBO Journal, Vol. 21, No. 8 pp. 1948-1956, 2002
© European Molecular Biology Organization 

A presenilin-1/-secretase cleavage releases the E-cadherin intracellular domain 
and regulates disassembly of adherens junctions 
Philippe Marambaud, Junichi Shioi, Geo Serban, Anastasios Georgakopoulos, Shula 
Sarner, Vanja Nagy, Lia Baki, Paul Wen, Spiros Efthimiopoulos, Zhiping Shao, 
Thomas Wisniewski1 and Nikolaos K. Robakis2 
Department of Psychiatry and Fishberg Research Center for Neurobiology, Mount 
Sinai School of Medicine, New York University, New York, NY 10029 and 
1Departments of Neurology and Pathology, New York University Medical Center, New 
York, NY 10016, USA 2Corresponding author e-mail: nikos.robakis@mssm.edu 
Received December 11, 2001; revised February 7, 2002; accepted February 25, 2002

         Abstract 
      Top
      Abstract
      Introduction
      Results
      Discussion
      Materials and methods
      Acknowledgements
      References

 
E-cadherin controls a wide array of cellular behaviors including cell–cell 
adhesion, differentiation and tissue development. Here we show that presenilin-1 
(PS1), a protein involved in Alzheimer’s disease, controls a -secretase-like 
cleavage of E-cadherin. This cleavage is stimulated by apoptosis or calcium 
influx and occurs between human E-cadherin residues Leu731 and Arg732 at the 
membrane–cytoplasm interface. The PS1/-secretase system cleaves both the 
full-length E-cadherin and a transmembrane C-terminal fragment, derived from a 
metalloproteinase cleavage after the E-cadherin ectodomain residue Pro700. The 
PS1/-secretase cleavage dissociates E-cadherins, ß-catenin and -catenin from the 
cytoskeleton, thus promoting disassembly of the E-cadherin–catenin adhesion 
complex. Furthermore, this cleavage releases the cytoplasmic E-cadherin to the 
cytosol and increases the levels of soluble ß- and -catenins. Thus, the 
PS1/-secretase system stimulates disassembly of the E-cadherin– catenin complex 
and increases the cytosolic pool of ß-catenin, a key regulator of the Wnt 
signaling pathway. 
Keywords: Alzheimer’s disease/ß-catenin/E-cadherin/presenilin-1/-secretase

         Introduction 
      Top
      Abstract
      Introduction
      Results
      Discussion
      Materials and methods
      Acknowledgements
      References

 
Classic cadherins, including epithelial (E)- and neural (N)-cadherins, are major 
cell–cell adhesion receptors involved in the development, maintenance and 
function of most tissues, including the nervous system, epithelia and endothelia 
(Steinberg and McNutt, 1999; McNeill, 2000; Tepass et al., 2000). In addition, 
cadherins play important roles in cell signaling, proliferation and 
differentiation (Steinberg and McNutt, 1999; Tepass et al., 2000). In 
cadherin-based adherens junctions (CAJs), the extracellular domains of 
transmembrane cadherins promote cell–cell adhesion by engaging in Ca2+-dependent 
homophilic interactions, while the cytoplasmic domains are linked to the actin 
cytoskeleton via - and ß-catenins (Steinberg and McNutt, 1999; Gumbiner, 2000). 
Post-translational regulation of cadherin adhesive activities, including 
proteolytic processing of cadherins and disassembly of CAJs, plays crucial roles 
in rapid changes in cell adhesion, signaling and apoptosis (Herren et al., 1998; 
Gumbiner, 2000; Vallorosi et al., 2000; Steinhusen et al., 2001), but the 
molecular mechanisms involved in cadherin processing and CAJ disassembly remain 
mostly unknown. 
PS1 is a polytopic transmembrane protein involved in most cases of early-onset 
familial Alzheimer’s disease (FAD). Cellular PS1 is cleaved to yield an 
N-terminal (PS1/NTF) and a C-terminal (PS1/CTF) fragment. Following cleavage, 
the resultant PS1 fragments form a stable 1:1 heterodimer (Thinakaran et al., 
1996; Podlisny et al., 1997) that binds to the cytoplasmic juxtamembrane region 
of E-cadherin (Baki et al., 2001). PS1 is found in the endoplasmic reticulum 
(ER)–Golgi system and the neuronal somatodendritic compartment (Cook et al., 
1996; Elder et al., 1996; Kovacs et al., 1996), but upon formation of cell–cell 
contacts PS1 concentrates at intercellular sites at the cell surface where it 
forms complexes with the CAJ (Georgakopoulos et al., 1999). In addition to 
E-cadherin, PS1 forms complexes with N-cadherin and it has been localized at 
synaptic sites (Georgakopoulos et al., 1999). Recently it was reported that PS1 
regulates a -secretase cleavage of both APP and Notch receptor and stimulates Aß 
production (De Strooper et al., 1999; Selkoe, 2001). Here we show that apoptosis 
or Ca2+ influx stimulates a PS1/-secretase cleavage of E-cadherin. This cleavage 
results in the release of the cytoplasmic sequence of E-cadherin, ß-catenin and 
-catenin to the soluble cytosol, thus facilitating disassembly of CAJs. In 
contrast to APP and Notch, however, both of which are cleaved within their 
transmembrane sequence (Schroeter et al., 1998; Gu et al., 2001; Sastre et al., 
2001; Yu et al., 2001), the PS1/-secretase cleavage of E-cadherin takes place at 
the membrane–cytosol interface. 

         Results 
      Top
      Abstract
      Introduction
      Results
      Discussion
      Materials and methods
      Acknowledgements
      References

 
A PS1/-secretase activity controls E-cadherin processing
We used extracts from PS1 knock-out mouse embryos (PS1–/–) (Baki et al., 2001) 
to investigate whether PS1 plays any role in E-cadherin processing. PS1–/– 
embryos had significantly higher amounts of a 38 kDa peptide that contained the 
cytoplasmic sequence of E-cadherin (E-Cad/CTF1) than did wild-type (PS1+/+) 
embryos, even though all embryos had similar levels of the full-length 
E-cadherin (Figure 1A, upper panel). As expected (De Strooper et al., 1999), 
PS1–/– embryos also contained increased levels of APP -stubs (Figure 1A, middle 
panels). E-Cad/CTF1 accumulates in a fibroblast cell line that was derived from 
PS1–/– mice (Baki et al., 2001) compared with a cell line from PS1+/+ mice, even 
though both cell lines express comparable amounts of transfected full-length 
E-cadherin (Figure 1B). The accumulation of E-Cad/CTF1 in PS1–/– cells under 
conditions of constant levels of the full-length protein suggests that a 
PS1-mediated activity may control metabolism of E-Cad/CTF1. Indeed, treatment of 
E-cadherin-transfected PS1+/+ fibroblasts with the selective -secretase 
inhibitor L-685,458 (Li et al., 2000; Shearman et al., 2000) increased cellular 
E-Cad/CTF1 compared with non-treated controls (Figure 1C), indicating that the 
PS1-associated -secretase activity (Esler and Wolfe, 2001) may be involved in 
the metabolism of E-Cad/CTF1. 



            View larger version (36K):
            [in this window]
            [in a new window]
              Fig. 1. A PS1-mediated -secretase activity controls E-cadherin 
            processing. (A) Extracts from PS1+/+ or PS1–/– mouse embryos were 
            probed on western blots with either anti-cytoplasmic E-cadherin C36 
            (upper panel) or anti-cytoplasmic APP R1 (middle panels) antibodies. 
            E-Cad/FL denotes full-length E-cadherin. The asterisk identifies 
            mouse IgGs. Lower panel: extract probed with anti-PS1/CTF antibody 
            33B10. (B) Extracts from E-cadherin-transfected PS1+/+ or PS1–/– 
            mouse fibroblasts were probed with anti-E-cadherin C36 (upper panel) 
            or 33B10 (lower panel) antibodies. (C) PS1+/+ fibroblasts were 
            treated for 6 h either with the -secretase inhibitor L-685,458 (0.5 
            µM) or with dimethylsulfoxide. Extracts from these cell cultures 
            were then probed with anti-E-cadherin C36. The asterisk indicates a 
            non-specific band.


 
Although our data suggested that peptide E-Cad/CTF1 is processed further by a 
PS1/-secretase-dependent cleavage, we were unable to detect any E-cadherin 
metabolites resulting from this activity either in embryos or in PS1+/+ 
fibroblasts. The apparent molecular weight and immunoreactivity of E-Cad/CTF1, 
however, suggested that this fragment derives from a matrix metalloproteinase 
(MMP) cleavage of the E-cadherin ectodomain. Since this cleavage is stimulated 
by apoptosis (Steinhusen et al., 2001), we asked whether the levels of the 
PS1/-secretase cleavage product of E-cadherin might increase in apoptotic 
conditions. Human epithelial cell line A431 that expresses high levels of 
endogenous E-cadherin and undergoes apoptosis under staurosporine (STS) 
treatment (Steinhusen et al., 2001) was used as a model. STS treatment of this 
cell line resulted in a time-dependent production of three E-cadherin C-terminal 
fragments migrating at 38, 33 and 29 kDa, respectively (Figure 2A). Production 
of the 38 kDa fragment is inhibited by the MMP inhibitor GM6001 (Galardy et al., 
1994), indicating that this fragment, which has immunoreactivity and apparent 
molecular mass identical to E-Cad/CTF1 (Figure 1), is derived from an MMP 
cleavage of E-cadherin (Figure 2B, middle panel, lanes 1 and 2). STS also 
increased a secreted 95 kDa fragment detected with E-cadherin ectodomain 
antibody H108 (Figure 3). This fragment (termed E-Cad/NTF1, Figure 2C) does not 
react with antibodies against cytoplasmic E-cadherin (not shown) and, like 
E-Cad/CTF1, it is also inhibited by GM6001 (Figure 2C), suggesting that 
E-Cad/NTF1 is the secreted counterpart of E-Cad/CTF1 (Figure 3). The 29 kDa 
fragment (E-Cad/CTF3) is inhibited by the specific caspase-3 inhibitor 
Z-DEVD-FMK (Figure 2B, middle panel, lanes 1 and 3), indicating that it is 
produced by an apoptosis-stimulated caspase-3 cleavage of E-cadherin (Steinhusen 
et al., 2001). 



            View larger version (49K):
            [in this window]
            [in a new window]
              Fig. 2. A PS1-mediated -secretase activity cleaves E-cadherin. (A) 
            A431 cells were treated for the indicated times with 1 µM of 
            staurosporine (STS) to induce apoptosis (Steinhusen et al., 2001), 
            solubilized in RIPA and blotted with anti-E-cadherin C36 antibody. 
            (B) A431 cells were pre-incubated for 30 min in the absence (–) or 
            presence (+) of GM6001 (2.5 µM), Z-DEVD-FMK (DEVD, 50 µM), an 
            inactive analogue of L-685,458 (Control, 0.5 µM) or L-685,458 (0.5 
            µM). Cells were then treated with STS for 6 h to induce apoptosis, 
            and cell extracts were probed with C36 antibody. Middle and lower 
            panels: the filter was exposed to X-ray films for either 5 or 0.5 
            min. (C) Conditioned media (20 µl) from A431 cells cultured in the 
            absence (–) or presence (+) of GM6001 and treated with STS as above 
            were probed on western blots with anti-E-cadherin ectodomain 
            antibody H108. E-Cad/NTF1 indicates the secreted E-cadherin 
            ectodomain. (D) Extracts from HEK293 cells stably transfected with 
            either wild-type (WT) PS1 or vector alone were immunoprecipitated 
            and probed with C36 antibody (upper panels). Lower panel: extracts 
            from the above cells were probed with anti-PS1/NTF antibody R222. 
            (E) A431 cells were pre-incubated for 30 min in the absence (–) or 
            presence (+) of GM6001 (2.5 µM). Cells were then treated with STS 
            for 6 h and cell extracts were probed on western blots with either 
            H108 (left panel) or C36 (right panel) antibodies.


 



            View larger version (18K):
            [in this window]
            [in a new window]
              Fig. 3. Amino acid sequence of human E-cadherin (SWISS-PROT 
            accession No. P12830) indicating the N-termini of E-Cad/CTF1 and 
            E-Cad/CTF2. Arrows identify the cleavage sites of MMP and 
            PS1/-secretase. The sequence mediating E-cadherin–PS1 binding is 
            underlined (Baki et al., 2001). Caspase-3 cleavage was reported 
            recently (Steinhusen et al., 2001). EC1–5 denote the extracellular 
            E-cadherin repeats. TM, transmembrane domain. H108 and C36 are 
            immunogenic regions recognized by the respective antibodies.


 
The -secretase inhibitor L-685,458 completely blocked production of the 33 kDa 
cadherin fragment (E-Cad/CTF2; Figure 2B, middle panel, lanes 1, 4 and 5), 
indicating that this fragment is produced by a -secretase-like cleavage of 
E-cadherin. Inhibition of E-Cad/CTF2 by L-685,458 correlates with an increase in 
E-Cad/CTF1 (Figure 2B, lower panels, lanes 4 and 5), suggesting that the former 
peptide derives from the latter by a -secretase-like activity. Accordingly, 
overexpression of PS1 in cell line HEK293 increased E-Cad/CTF2 and decreased 
E-Cad/CTF1 (Figure 2D). That E-Cad/CTF2 is produced even when E-Cad/CTF1 is 
inhibited (Figure 2B, lane 2) suggests that the PS1/-secretase-dependent 
E-Cad/CTF2 can also be derived from full-length E-cadherin. In agreement with 
this suggestion, a 100 kDa E-cadherin fragment recognized by antibody H108 but 
not by anti-cytoplasmic E-cadherin antibody C36 (see Figure 3 for sequences 
recognized by these antibodies) was detected in cell extracts of GM6001-treated 
A431 cultures (Figure 2E), suggesting that this fragment (E-Cad/NTF2) is the 
N-terminal counterpart of E-Cad/CTF2 (see also Figure 3). In addition to A431, 
two other cell lines, SW480 and LNCaP, also produced the PS1/-secretase fragment 
E-Cad/CTF2 under Ca2+ influx conditions (data not shown), indicating that this 
is a general mechanism of E-cadherin processing. 
Identification of the PS1/-secretase and MMP cleavage sites of E-cadherin
E-Cad/CTF1 and E-Cad/CTF2 were affinity purified from STS-treated A431 cells. 
Antibody H108 against E-cadherin sequence 600–707 (numbering according to the 
full-length unprocessed human E-cadherin) reacted with secreted E-Cad/NTF1 
(Figure 2C) but not with cellular E-Cad/CTF1 (not shown), suggesting that the 
MMP cleavage of E-cadherin occurs closer to the extracytoplasmic face of the 
plasma membrane than previously reported (Ito et al., 1999). Indeed, Edman 
sequencing of E-Cad/CTF1 through 14 cycles showed the following major sequence: 
VEAGLQIPAILGIL. This is a unique sequence corresponding to human E-cadherin 
residues 701–714. The N-terminus of this sequence is located seven residues 
upstream of the transmembrane sequence of E-cadherin (Figure 3). Mass 
spectrometry analysis of E-Cad/CTF1 showed no peptides upstream of the cleavage 
site that was determined by Edman sequencing (not shown). Thus, the 38 kDa 
E-Cad/CTF1 is produced by an MMP cleavage after E-cadherin residue Pro700 
(Figure 3). 
Edman sequencing of E-Cad/CTF2 yielded the following sequence: RRRAVVKEPLL. This 
is a unique sequence corresponding to human E-cadherin residues 732–742. Mass 
spectrometric analysis of E-Cad/CTF2 yielded E-cadherin peptides predicted from 
the sequencing data (not shown). These results show that the PS1-mediated 
-secretase cleavage of E-cadherin takes place between residues Leu731 and Arg732 
at the interface of the membrane with the cytoplasm (Figure 3). 
The -secretase-mediated cleavage of E-cadherin promotes disassembly of adherens 
junctions
The molecular weight and immunoreactivity of the isolated peptides suggest that 
they contain the entire E-cadherin cytoplasmic sequence including the 
ß-catenin-binding site (Steinberg and McNutt, 1999). Co- immunoprecipitation 
experiments showed that the MMP cleavage product E-Cad/CTF1 binds both ß-catenin 
and PS1, whereas the -secretase product E-Cad/CTF2 binds only ß-catenin (Figure 
4A). Thus, the PS1/-secretase cleavage of E-cadherin dissociates PS1 from the 
E-cadherin–ß-catenin complex. 



            View larger version (23K):
            [in this window]
            [in a new window]
              Fig. 4. Released E-Cad/CTF2 dissociates from PS1 but remains bound 
            to ß-catenin. (A) Extracts from STS-treated A431 cells were 
            immunoprecipitated with antibodies against PS1 (I-R222), pre-immune 
            serum (PI-R222), ß-catenin or desmoglein, and the immunoprecipitates 
            (IPs) obtained were probed on western blots with anti-E-cadherin 
            antibody C36. For reference, cell lysate was also probed; the 
            asterisk shows IgGs. (B) A431 cells treated for 6 h with STS were 
            fractionated into membrane, soluble cytosolic and Triton 
            X-100-insoluble (TX100- insoluble) fractions, and the fractions 
            obtained were then probed on western blots with C36 antibody.


 
Subcellular fractionation of STS-treated A431 cells showed that full-length 
E-cadherin and E-Cad/CTF1 are found only in the membrane and cytoskeletal 
(Triton X-100-insoluble) fractions while E-Cad/CTF2 localizes in the membrane 
and in the soluble cytosol (Figure 4B), suggesting that the PS1/-secretase 
cleavage results in the solubilization of the cytoplasmic sequence of 
E-cadherin. 
In stable cell–cell adhesion, the E-cadherin– ß-catenin complex of the CAJ is 
anchored to the actin cytoskeleton via -catenin, and this association is 
manifested by the insolubility of the complex components in Triton X-100 (Nathke 
et al., 1994; Baki et al., 2001). Induction of apoptosis or calcium influx 
disrupts cadherin-mediated cell–cell adhesion by cleaving cadherin and 
disassembling the CAJ complexes (Herren et al., 1998; Ito et al., 1999; 
Vallorosi et al., 2000; Steinhusen et al., 2001). To determine whether the 
-secretase cleavage of E-cadherin is involved in the CAJ disassembly, we induced 
calcium influx with ionomycin in A431 cells in the absence or presence of the 
-secretase inhibitor L-685,458. In the absence of this inhibitor, ionomycin 
induced a time-dependent decrease in the cytoskeletal (Triton X-100-insoluble) 
fraction of both full-length E-cadherin and E-Cad/CTF1 (Figure 5A, left panel), 
and this decrease correlated with a corresponding increase in soluble cytosolic 
E-Cad/CTF2 (Figure 5A, right panel). Similarly, ionomycin decreased the 
cytoskeletal association (Triton X-100-insoluble fraction) of the CAJ components 
ß- and -catenin with a concomitant significant increase in their soluble 
cytosolic levels (Figure 5B). These data indicate that ionomycin induces a 
time-dependent disassembly of the E-cadherin–catenin cytoskeletal complex 
resulting in increased production of the PS1/-secretase fragment E-Cad/CTF2 and 
in the solubilization of cytoskeletal ß- and -catenins. L-685,458 blocked the 
ionomycin-induced metabolism of cytoskeletal E-Cad/CTF1 and partially inhibited 
degradation of the full length E-cadherin (Triton X-100 insoluble, Figure 5A, 
left panel) while it abolished production of soluble cytosolic E-Cad/CTF2 
(Figure 5A, right panel), suggesting that L-685,458 inhibits the -secretase 
cleavage of both cytoskeletal full-length E-cadherin and E-Cad/CTF1. In 
addition, L-685,458 delayed the ionomycin-induced decrease of cytoskeletal ß- 
and -catenin and inhibited their release to the soluble cytosol (Figure 5B and 
C). These data show that the -secretase cleavage of E-cadherin promotes 
dissociation of the CAJ components from the cytoskeleton and their release ino 
the soluble cytosol. 



            View larger version (36K):
            [in this window]
            [in a new window]
              Fig. 5. A PS1/-secretase cleavage promotes disassembly of the 
            E-cadherin–catenin adhesion complex. (A and B) A431 cell cultures 
            were pre-incubated for 30 min in the absence (–) or presence (+) of 
            L-685,458 and then treated for the indicated times with ionomycin 
            (10 µM). Cell extracts were fractionated, and the Triton 
            X-100-insoluble and cytosolic soluble fractions were analyzed on 
            western blots with antibodies against cytoplasmic E-cadherin C36 (A) 
            or ß- and -catenins (B). The immunoblots are representative of three 
            independent experiments. (C) Signals from cytosolic ß-catenin (upper 
            graph) or -catenin (lower graph) obtained from ionomycin-treated 
            cultures in the presence (+L-685,458) or absence (–L-685,458) of 
            -secretase inhibitor L-685,458 were quantified by densitometric 
            analysis. The graphs show the averaged immunoreactivities observed 
            in three independent experiments.


 
The PS1/-secretase role in the disassembly of CAJ was examined further using 
laser scanning confocal microscopy (LSCM). PS1, cytoplasmic and ectodomain 
sequences of E-cadherin, ß-catenin and -catenin concentrated at cell–cell 
contacts in confluent A431 cells (Figure 6, left panels; see also Georgakopoulos 
et al., 1999). Ionomycin treatment disrupted cell–cell adhesion and decreased 
plasma membrane staining of all epitopes. PS1, cytoplasmic E-cadherin, ß-catenin 
and -catenin staining became more diffuse throughout the cytoplasm (Figure 6, 
middle panels). In contrast, cadherin ectodomain staining was now barely 
detectable, suggesting a significant reduction in the cellular levels of this 
epitope (Figure 6H), in agreement with the ionomycin-induced cleavage and 
secretion of E-cadherin ectodomain (see also Ito et al., 1999). 



            View larger version (56K):
            [in this window]
            [in a new window]
              Fig. 6. Immunostaining and LSCM analysis of ionomycin- and 
            L-685,458-treated A431 cultures. A431 cells were pre-incubated for 
            30 min in the presence or absence of L-685,458 and then treated for 
            45 min with ionomycin. Control cells were not treated. Following the 
            ionomycin-induced cell–cell dissociation, the distribution of PS1, 
            E-cadherin, ß-catenin and -catenin in all cultures was analyzed by 
            LSCM using the constant detector setting. Cells were double labeled 
            either with anti-PS1/NTF antibody R222 (A–C) and anti-cytoplasmic 
            E-cadherin antibody C36 (D–F), or with anti-ectodomain E-cadherin 
            antibody H108 (G–I) and anti-ß-catenin antibody (J–L). Cells were 
            also labeled for -catenin (M–O). Arrows indicate a cell population 
            showing ß-catenin immunoreactivity at the cell surface without 
            ectodomain E-cadherin labeling (I and L). Scale bar = 30 µm.


 
Pre-incubation with L-685,458 significantly delayed loss of cell surface 
staining of all epitopes (Figure 6, right panels). Ectodomain E-cadherin 
staining was also partially preserved at the cell surface and at cell–cell 
contacts (Figure 6G–I), in agreement with our finding that L-685,458 inhibits 
the ionomycin-induced metabolism of cytoskeletal full-length E-cadherin (Figure 
5A). However, two-color immunofluorescence of L-685,458-treated cells revealed a 
cell population containing ß-catenin but no ectodomain E-cadherin at the cell 
surface (arrows in Figure 6I and L), suggesting that these represent junctional 
complexes of ß-catenin with E-Cad/CTF1 (see also Figure 4A). In 
L-685,458-treated cultures, there was a complete junctional overlap between 
staining of cytoplasmic E-cadherin and PS1 (Figure 6C and F), suggesting that 
cell surface PS1 remains bound to both full-length E-cadherin and E-Cad/CTF1. 
This observation concurs with our biochemical data showing that PS1 binds both 
full-length E-cadherin and E-Cad/CTF1 (Figure 4A). 
A cadherin mutant unable to bind PS1 is not cleaved by the PS1/-secretase 
activity
To examine whether PS1 binding to E-cadherin is necessary for the PS1/-secretase 
cleavage, we used E-cadherin mutant GGG759-761AAA (Thoreson et al., 2000). 
E-cadherin-negative A431D cells were transfected either with wild-type 
E-cadherin or with the E-cadherin mutant. In contrast to wild-type protein, 
mutant E-cadherin failed to bind PS1 (Figure 7A), consistent with reports that 
the E-cadherin sequence 760–771 (corresponding to residues 604–615 of mature 
processed E-cadherin) is necessary for PS1–E-cadherin binding (Baki et al., 
2001). Upon ionomycin treatment, cells expressing wild-type E-cadherin showed a 
significant increase in soluble E-Cad/CTF2, ß-catenin and -catenin. In contrast, 
cells expressing mutant E-cadherin showed no ionomycin-induced increase in 
soluble ß- or -catenin (Figure 7B). Furthermore, no soluble E-Cad/CTF2 was 
detected in mutant transfectants in either the presence or absence of ionomycin 
(Figure 7B). Thus, PS1 binding to E-cadherin is required for the PS1/-secretase 
cleavage of E-cadherin and for the release of E-Cad/CTF2, ß-catenin and -catenin 
into the soluble cytosol. 



            View larger version (54K):
            [in this window]
            [in a new window]
              Fig. 7. E-cadherin mutation GGG759-761AAA prevents binding to PS1 
            and inhibits -secretase cleavage of E-cadherin and cytosolic release 
            of catenins. (A) Right panel: extracts from A431D cells stably 
            transfected with vector, wild-type E-cadherin (WT E-Cad) or 
            E-cadherin mutant GGG759-761AAA (761AAA) were immunoprecipitated 
            with anti-PS1/NTF antibody R222 (PS1 IP) and the IPs were probed 
            with either anti-E-cadherin antibody C36 (upper panel) or 
            anti-PS1/CTF antibody 33B10 (lower panel). The left panel shows 
            relative E-cadherin levels in transfectants. (B) A431D cells 
            transfected with either wild-type E-cadherin or E-cadherin mutant 
            761AAA were incubated in the absence (–) or presence (+) of 
            ionomycin for 45 min, and RIPA extracts were probed on western blots 
            with C36 antibody (upper panel). Cytosolic fractions of the above 
            cultures were probed on western blots with antibodies against 
            E-cadherin (C36, second panel), ß-catenin (third panel) or -catenin 
            (lower panel). (C) Schematic representation of the 
            PS1/-secretase-mediated disassembly of CAJs. An MMP-mediated 
            proteolytic activity cleaves the extracellular domain of 
            cytoskeletal E-cadherin and releases E-Cad/NTF1 to the extracellular 
            medium (a). Fragment E-Cad/CTF1 containing the transmembrane and 
            cytoplasmic sequence of E-cadherin remains bound to PS1, ß-catenin, 
            -catenin and the actin cytoskeleton. E-Cad/CTF1 is then cleaved by a 
            PS1/-secretase activity at the membrane–cytosol interface to produce 
            E-Cad/CTF2, which dissociates from both PS1 and F-actin and is 
            released to the cytosol in a complex with ß-catenin (b). Full-length 
            E-cadherin bound to the cytoskeleton can also be cleaved by the 
            PS1/-secretase activity (c). No E-Cad/CTF2–-catenin complex was 
            detected, suggesting that -catenin dissociates from E-Cad/CTF2 
            (unpublished observations). , -catenin; ß, ß-catenin.


 

         Discussion 
      Top
      Abstract
      Introduction
      Results
      Discussion
      Materials and methods
      Acknowledgements
      References

 
Disassembly of CAJs and abrogation of cadherin-mediated cell–cell adhesion is 
involved in changes of cell state including differentiation, apoptosis and tumor 
metastasis. For example, induction of apoptotic cell death or Ca2+ imbalance 
involves cleavage of cadherins and disassembly of CAJs (Herren et al., 1998; Ito 
et al., 1999; Vallorosi et al., 2000; Steinhusen et al., 2001). Furthermore, in 
the case of metastasis of epithelia tumors, inhibition of E-cadherin-mediated 
cell–cell adhesion is promoted by cleavage and secretion of extracytoplasmic 
E-cadherin by MMPs (Lochter et al., 1997; Christofori and Semb, 1999; Noe et 
al., 2001). Although in some cell cultures PS1 was found mainly in the ER–Golgi 
system (De Strooper et al., 1997; Cupers et al., 2001), in cell cultures with 
exten sive cell–cell contacts and in tissues PS1 concentrates mainly at the 
plasma membrane (Georgakopoulos et al., 1999; Nowotny et al., 2000; Xia et al., 
2001) and, in the brain, this protein concentrates at synaptic contacts 
(Georgakopoulos et al., 1999; Ribaut-Barassin et al., 2000). In addition, PS1 
has been detected in vesicles (Efthimiopoulos et al., 1998) and at the surface 
of both Drosophila cells (Nowotny et al., 2000) and adhesive lamellipodia 
(Schwarzman et al., 1999). The plasma membrane localization of PS1 is entirely 
consistent with its role in the processing of cell surface transmembrane 
proteins including APP, Notch1 receptor and E-cadherin. Our data define a novel 
mechanism of CAJ disassembly (Figure 7C). Key steps in this mechanism are the 
proteolytic cleavage of E-cadherin by a PS1/-secretase activity at the 
membrane–cytoplasm interface and a novel MMP cleavage of extracellular 
E-cadherin that occurs close to the plasma membrane. E-Cad/CTF1, the product of 
the MMP cleavage, remains bound to catenins and anchored to the cytoskeleton 
(Figure 7C). The PS1/-secretase cleavage dissociates both E-Cad/CTF1 and 
full-length E-cadherin from the cytoskeleton and promotes solubilization of 
cytoskeletal ß- and -catenin, thus promoting disassembly of the CAJs. That the 
PS1/-secretase E-cadherin cleavage is significantly increased upon cell 
apoptosis or Ca2+ imbalance suggests the existence of signaling mechanisms that 
regulate the activity of the PS1/-secretase proteolytic system. 
It was shown recently that under conditions that favor cell–cell adhesion, PS1 
stabilizes the E-cadherin–catenin adhesion complex (Baki et al., 2001). Combined 
with the present data, this suggests that with regard to the formation and 
disassembly of CAJs, PS1 may have two distinct activities. (i) Under conditions 
promoting cell–cell adhesion, incorporation of PS1 into the E-cadherin–catenin 
complex results in the stabilization of cell–cell adhesion (Baki et al., 2001). 
(ii) In contrast, under conditions of cell–cell dissociation or apoptosis, PS1 
promotes disassembly of adherens junctions, thus facilitating cell separation. 
Having both activities in the same polypeptide may represent an efficient and 
quick way for the formation and dissolution of cell–cell contacts. Interestingly 
p120ctn, a protein that like PS1 binds the cytoplasmic juxtamembrane region of 
E-cadherin, has also been shown to have either positive or negative effects on 
CAJ-mediated cell–cell adhesion (Thoreson et al., 2000). 
Induction of the PS1/-secretase cleavage of E-cadherin results in the release of 
the E-Cad/CTF2–ß-catenin complex from the cytoskeleton and in a significant 
increase in the soluble cytosolic ß-catenin (Figure 5C). Free cytosolic 
ß-catenin is a key potent regulator of the Wnt signaling pathway. It 
translocates to the nucleus where it complexes with Lef-1/Tcf transcription 
factors to activate expression of target genes (Polakis, 2000). Thus, production 
of the E-Cad/CTF2–ß-catenin complex, rather than free ß-catenin, may provide a 
large pool of complexed inactive ß-catenin from where it could be released 
according to the transcriptional needs of the cell. The potential importance of 
E-Cad/CTF2 in signal transduction is indicated in recent studies using 
artificial constructs overexpressing soluble cytoplasmic cadherin sequences. 
These constructs bind ß-catenin and inhibit the ß-catenin/Lef-1/Tcf signaling 
events (Sadot et al., 1998; Gottardi et al., 2001). In addition, by sequestering 
ß-catenin, these constructs act as dominant-negative agents in cell growth and 
development (Sanson et al., 1996; Gottardi et al., 2001). Thus the 
PS1/-secretase-derived E-Cad/CTF2 may provide a cellular regulatory link between 
changes in the E-cadherin-based cell–cell adhesion and the Wnt signal 
transduction pathway. That PS1–/– mouse embryos accumulate E-Cad/CTF1 indicates 
that PS1/-secretase processing of E-cadherins occurs early in development and 
may control cadherin-mediated developmental processes and cell fate decisions. 
The PS1/-secretase cleavage of E-cadherin shows several important differences 
from the corresponding cleavages in APP and Notch. Recent data (Gu et al., 2001; 
Sastre et al., 2001; Yu et al., 2001) suggest that the APP cleavage may not 
occur in the middle of the transmembrane sequence of APP that defines the C- 
terminus of Aß peptides, but rather closer to the cytoplasm about three residues 
inside the membrane. Our data show that the -secretase cleavage of E-cadherin 
takes place at the end of the transmembrane sequence probably outside the lipid 
bilayer at the membrane–cytoplasm interface, suggesting that an intramembranous 
cleavage may not be a requirement for the PS1/-secretase proteolytic system. 
Similarly to APP and Notch, -secretase cleaves a membrane-bound C-terminal 
fragment of E-cadherin resulting from an ectodomain cleavage. In contrast to 
full-length APP and Notch, however, which do not seem to be cleaved by 
-secretase, full-length E-cadherin may also be processed by this activity. 
Finally, our data suggest that E-cadherin mutants unable to bind PS1 are not 
cleaved by the PS1/-secretase system. It would be important to determine whether 
PS1 binding to APP or Notch is a requirement for the -secretase cleavage of 
these proteins. 
Our findings have important implications for Alzheimer’s disease because they 
raise the possibility that the PS1 FAD mutants affect the PS1/-secretase 
cleavage of several CAJ systems. We observed that in addition to E-cadherin, two 
more classic cadherins, N- and VE-cadherins, both of which display high homology 
to E-cadherin, are metabolized by the PS1/-secretase system (unpublished 
observations). Both E- and N-cadherins have been found at the synapse and are 
reported to play key roles in synaptic structure and function (Fannon and 
Colman, 1996; Tang et al., 1998; Tanaka et al., 2000). In addition, VE-cadherin 
plays important roles in endothelial permeability (Sandoval et al., 2001), 
vascular integrity (Corada et al., 1999) and survival signaling of endothelial 
tissue (Carmeliet et al., 1999). It will be important to examine what roles, if 
any, the PS1/-secretase cleavage plays in the functions of the above cadherin 
systems. Furthermore, it will be important to determine any potential effects of 
the PS1 FAD mutants on the -secretase processing of classic cadherins and their 
functions. However, our data suggest that potential therapeutic treatments 
targeting -secretase may also affect the proteolytic processing and/or function 
of a number of cadherin adhesion/signaling systems. 

         Materials and methods 
      Top
      Abstract
      Introduction
      Results
      Discussion
      Materials and methods
      Acknowledgements
      References

 
Materials and antibodies
GM6001 was obtained from Chemicon International, Inc., STS was from Sigma, and 
ionomycin and Z-DEVD-FMK were from Calbiochem. L-685,458 and its inactive 
analogue were kindly provided by Dr M.S.Shearman (Merck Research Labs). Rabbit 
polyclonal antibody R222 was raised against amino acids 2–12 of human PS1/NTF, 
and mouse monoclonal antibody 33B10 is specific for residues 331–350 of human 
PS1/CTF (Georgakopoulos et al., 1999). Rabbit polyclonal antibody R1 was raised 
against human APP751 amino acids 729–751 (Anderson et al., 1989). 
Anti-E-cadherin (clone C36), anti-ß-catenin and anti--catenin monoclonal 
antibodies were obtained from BD Transduction Laboratories; antibody H108 
against E-cadherin ectodomain was obtained from Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc. 
Mouse embryo preparation
Wild-type and PS1 knock-out mouse embryos (Baki et al., 2001) were collected at 
day 18.5 post-coitum and solubilized by mechanical dissociation and sonication 
in RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris–HCl pH 8, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% SDS, 1% NP-40, 0.5% 
sodium deoxycholate, 1x Complete protease inhibitor cocktail, Roche). A 50 µg 
aliquot of extract was analyzed by western blot. 
Cell cultures and transfections
Cells were grown in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) plus 10% fetal 
bovine serum, penicillin and streptomycin in 5% CO2 at 37°C. Fibroblast cell 
lines derived from either wild-type (PS1+/+) or PS1 knock-out (PS1–/–) mice were 
stably transfected with human E-cadherin as described (Baki et al., 2001). A431 
cells were from the American Type Culture Collection. Stable transfectants of 
PS1 cDNA in HEK293 cells were prepared as described (Georgakopoulos et al., 
1999). A431D cells stably transfected with wild-type or GGG759-761AAA mutant 
E-cadherin were provided by Dr A.B.Reynolds. 
Subcellular fractionation
Confluent A431 cells (one 100 mm dish) were rinsed and scraped with 4°C 
phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). Cells were then placed into 1 ml of buffer A 
(20 mM Tris–HCl pH 7.5, 0.25 M sucrose, 10 mM EGTA, 2 mM EDTA, 1x Complete 
protease inhibitor cocktail, Roche), passed through a 27 gauge needle 10 times, 
and the obtained cell lysate was centrifuged at 500 g for 10 min at 4°C. The 
supernatant was then centrifuged at 120 000 g for 45 min at 4°C to separate the 
cytosolic and crude membrane fractions. The pellet (crude membrane fraction) was 
washed twice with buffer A and resuspended by sonication in 400 µl of buffer A 
containing 1% Triton X-100. The suspension was incubated at 4°C for 30 min and 
then centrifuged at 120 000 g for 45 min at 4°C to separate the membrane and 
Triton X-100-insoluble fractions. The pellet (Triton X-100-insoluble fraction) 
was washed twice with buffer A and solubilized by sonication in RIPA buffer. A 
20 µg aliquot of proteins from the different fractions was analyzed by SDS–PAGE. 

Immunoprecipitations (IPs), immunoblotting, immunofluorescence and confocal 
microscopy
For western blot analysis of cell extracts, cells were washed with PBS and then 
solubilized in RIPA buffer. For IPs, cells were solubilized in HEPES buffer (25 
mM HEPES pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1x Complete protease inhibitor cocktail, Roche) 
containing 1% digitonin (IPs with I-R222 and PI-R222 antibodies) or 1% Triton 
X-100 (IPs with ß-catenin and desmoglein antibodies). Following centrifugation 
at 17 000 g for 10 min, supernatants (1 mg of protein) were pre-cleared with 
protein A– or protein G–agarose (Pierce) for 2 h. Supernatants were then 
incubated with antibodies overnight at 4°C and treated for 2 h with protein A– 
agarose (polyclonal antibodies) or with protein G–agarose (monoclonal 
antibodies). IPs were washed with HEPES buffer containing either 1% digitonin or 
1% Triton X-100 and analyzed by SDS–PAGE. Immunofluorescence and confocal 
microscopy were performed as described (Georgakopoulos et al., 1999). Briefly, 
cells were plated on 22 x 22 mm collagen-coated glass coverslips and fixed in 
cold methanol for 10 min at –20°C. Following washing in TBS (25 mM Tris–HCl pH 
7.4, 150 mM NaCl), cells were treated with 10% goat serum in SuperBlock (Pierce) 
for 1 h, incubated overnight with primary antibody (1:100), washed in TBS and 
then incubated with species-specific Alexa FluorTM secondary antibody conjugates 
(Molecular Probes). Cells were washed with TBS, mounted with Prolong antifade 
kit (Molecular Probes) and photographed on a Leica confocal laser scanning 
microscope. 
Purification, mass spectrometry and N-terminal sequence analysis of E-cadherin 
C-terminal fragments
A431 cells treated with 1 µM STS for 6 h were solubilized by sonication in RIPA 
buffer. A 50 mg aliquot of protein extract was pre-cleared with 20 µg of H108 
antibody, 20 µg of unrelated monoclonal antibody and a mixture of protein A– and 
protein G–agarose (Pierce). The pre-cleared supernatant was treated overnight 
with 120 µg of C36 anti-E-cadherin antibody, and immunoglobulins were 
precipitated with 500 µl of protein G–agarose. Immunoprecipitates were split 
into two samples and submitted to SDS–PAGE. One sample was stained with GelCode 
blue stain reagent (Pierce) and the 33 and 38 kDa fragments of E-cadherin were 
submitted to MALDI-MS Peptide Mass Mapping after in-gel digestion (Dr 
M.A.Gawinowicz, HHMI/Columbia University Protein Core Facility). The second 
sample was transferred on to a polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF) membrane and the 
38 and 33 kDa bands corresponding to E-Cad/CTF1 and E-Cad/CTF2, respectively, 
were subjected to sequential derivitization and cleavage of N-terminal amino 
acids by Edman chemistry followed by reverse-phase high performance liquid 
chromatography, (automated Applied Biosystems Procise 492 Peptide Sequencer, New 
York University Protein Analysis Facility). 

         Acknowledgements 
      Top
      Abstract
      Introduction
      Results
      Discussion
      Materials and methods
      Acknowledgements
      References

 
We thank Dr M.S.Shearman (Merck Research Labs) for L-685,458 and inactive 
analogue, Drs A.B.Reynolds and M.A.Thoreson for cadherin mutant GGG759-761AAA, 
and Dr V.L.Friedrich,Jr for critical comments. This work was supported by NIH 
grants AG-17926, AG-08200, AG-05138 and AG-15408, the American Health Assistance 
Foundation and the Alzheimer’s Association. 

         References 
      Top
      Abstract
      Introduction
      Results
      Discussion
      Materials and methods
      Acknowledgements
      References

 
Anderson,J.P. et al. (1989) Differential brain expression of the Alzheimer’s 
amyloid precursor protein. EMBO J., 8, 3627–3632.[Abstract]
Baki,L. et al. (2001) Presenilin-1 binds cytoplasmic epithelial cadherin, 
inhibits cadherin/p120 association and regulates stability and function of the 
cadherin/catenin adhesion complex. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 98, 
2381–2386.[Abstract/Free Full Text]
Carmeliet,P. et al. (1999) Targeted deficiency or cytosolic truncation of the 
VE-cadherin gene in mice impairs VEGF-mediated endothelial survival and 
angiogenesis. Cell, 98, 147–157.[Medline]
Christofori,G. and Semb,H. (1999) The role of the cell-adhesion molecule 
E-cadherin as a tumour-suppressor gene. Trends Biochem. Sci., 24, 
73–76.[Medline]
Cook,D.G., Sung,J.C., Golde,T.E., Felsenstein,K.M., Wojczyk,B.S., Tanzi,R.E., 
Trojanowski,J.Q., Lee,V.M. and Doms,R.W. (1996) Expression and analysis of 
presenilin 1 in a human neuronal system: localization in cell bodies and 
dendrites. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 93, 9223–9228.[Abstract/Free Full Text]
Corada,M. et al. (1999) Vascular endothelial-cadherin is an important 
determinant of microvascular integrity in vivo. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 96, 
9815–9820.[Abstract/Free Full Text]
Cupers,P., Bentahir,M., Craessaerts,K., Orlans,I., Vanderstichele,H., Saftig,P., 
De Strooper,B. and Annaert,W. (2001) The discrepancy between presenilin 
subcellular localization and -secretase processing of amyloid precursor protein. 
J. Cell Biol., 154, 731–740.[Abstract/Free Full Text]
De Strooper,B. et al. (1997) Phosphorylation, subcellular localization and 
membrane orientation of the Alzheimer’s disease-associated presenilins. J. Biol. 
Chem., 272, 3590–3598.[Abstract/Free Full Text]
De Strooper,B. et al. (1999) A presenilin-1-dependent -secretase-like protease 
mediates release of Notch intracellular domain. Nature, 398, 518–522.[Medline]
Efthimiopoulos,S. et al. (1998) Enrichment of presenilin 1 peptides in neuronal 
large dense-core and somatodendritic clathrin-coated vesicles. J. Neurochem., 
71, 2365–2372.[Abstract]
Elder,G.A. et al. (1996) Identification and neuron specific expression of the 
S182/presenilin I protein in human and rodent brains. J. Neurosci. Res., 45, 
308–320.[Medline]
Esler,W.P. and Wolfe,M.S. (2001) A portrait of Alzheimer secretases—new features 
and familiar faces. Science, 293, 1449–1454.[Abstract/Free Full Text]
Fannon,A.M. and Colman,D.R. (1996) A model for central synaptic junctional 
complex formation based on the differential adhesive specificities of the 
cadherins. Neuron, 17, 423–434.[Medline]
Galardy,R.E. et al. (1994) Low molecular weight inhibitors in corneal 
ulceration. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci., 732, 315–323.[Medline]
Georgakopoulos,A. et al. (1999) Presenilin-1 forms complexes with the 
cadherin/catenin cell–cell adhesion system and is recruited to intercellular and 
synaptic contacts. Mol. Cell, 4, 893–902.[Medline]
Gottardi,C.J., Wong,E. and Gumbiner,B.M. (2001) E-cadherin suppresses cellular 
transformation by inhibiting ß-catenin signaling in an adhesion-independent 
manner. J. Cell Biol., 153, 1049–1060.[Abstract/Free Full Text]
Gu,Y., Misonou,H., Sato,T., Dohmae,N., Takio,K. and Ihara,Y. (2001) Distinct 
intramembrane cleavage of the ß-amyloid precursor protein family resembling 
-secretase-like cleavage of Notch. J. Biol. Chem., 276, 
35235–35238.[Abstract/Free Full Text]
Gumbiner,B.M. (2000) Regulation of cadherin adhesive activity. J. Cell Biol., 
148, 399–404.[Abstract/Free Full Text]
Herren,B., Levkau,B., Raines,E.W. and Ross,R. (1998) Cleavage of ß-catenin and 
plakoglobin and shedding of VE-cadherin during endothelial apoptosis: evidence 
for a role for caspases and metalloproteinases. Mol. Biol. Cell, 9, 
1589–1601.[Abstract/Free Full Text]
Ito,K., Okamoto,I., Araki,N., Kawano,Y., Nakao,M., Fujiyama,S., Tomita,K., 
Mimori,T. and Saya,H. (1999) Calcium influx triggers the sequential proteolysis 
of extracellular and cytoplasmic domains of E-cadherin, leading to loss of 
ß-catenin from cell–cell contacts. Oncogene, 18, 7080–7090.[Medline]
Kovacs,D.M. et al. (1996) Alzheimer-associated presenilins 1 and 2: neuronal 
expression in brain and localization to intracellular membranes in mammalian 
cells. Nature Med., 2, 224–229.[Medline]
Li,Y.M. et al. (2000) Photoactivated -secretase inhibitors directed to the 
active site covalently label presenilin 1. Nature, 405, 689–694.[Medline]
Lochter,A., Galosy,S., Muschler,J., Freedman,N., Werb,Z. and Bissell,M.J. (1997) 
Matrix metalloproteinase stromelysin-1 triggers a cascade of molecular 
alterations that leads to stable epithelial-to-mesenchymal conversion and a 
premalignant phenotype in mammary epithelial cells. J. Cell Biol., 139, 
1861–1872.[Abstract/Free Full Text]
McNeill,H. (2000) Sticking together and sorting things out: adhesion as a force 
in development. Nature Rev. Genet., 1, 100–108.[Medline]
Nathke,I.S., Hinck,L., Swedlow,J.R., Papkoff,J. and Nelson,W.J. (1994) Defining 
interactions and distributions of cadherin and catenin complexes in polarized 
epithelial cells. J. Cell Biol., 125, 1341–1352.[Abstract]
Noe,V., Fingleton,B., Jacobs,K., Crawford,H.C., Vermeulen,S., Steelant,W., 
Bruyneel,E., Matrisian,L.M. and Mareel,M. (2001) Release of an invasion promoter 
E-cadherin fragment by matrilysin and stromelysin-1. J. Cell Sci., 114, 
111–118.[Abstract/Free Full Text]
Nowotny,P. et al. (2000) Posttranslational modification and plasma membrane 
localization of the Drosophila melanogaster presenilin. Mol. Cell. Neurosci., 
15, 88–98.[Medline]
Podlisny,M.B. et al. (1997) Presenilin proteins undergo heterogeneous 
endoproteolysis between Thr291 and Ala299 and occur as stable N- and C-terminal 
fragments in normal and Alzheimer brain tissue. Neurobiol. Dis., 3, 
325–337.[Medline]
Polakis,P. (2000) Wnt signaling and cancer. Genes Dev., 14, 1837–1851.[Free Full 
Text]
Ribaut-Barassin,C., Moussaoui,S., Brugg,B., Haeberle,A.M., Huber,G., 
Imperato,A., Delhaye-Bouchaud,N., Mariani,J. and Bailly,Y.J. (2000) Hemisynaptic 
distribution patterns of presenilins and ß-APP isoforms in the rodent cerebellum 
and hippocampus. Synapse, 35, 96–110.[Medline]
Sadot,E., Simcha,I., Shtutman,M., Ben-Ze’ev,A. and Geiger,B. (1998) Inhibition 
of ß-catenin-mediated transactivation by cadherin derivatives. Proc. Natl Acad. 
Sci. USA, 95, 15339–15344.[Abstract/Free Full Text]
Sandoval,R., Malik,A., Minshall,R., Kouklis,P., Ellis,C. and Tiruppathi,C. 
(2001) Ca(2+) signalling and PKC activate increased endothelial permeability by 
disassembly of VE-cadherin junctions. J. Physiol., 533, 433–445.[Abstract/Free 
Full Text]
Sanson,B., White,P. and Vincent,J.P. (1996) Uncoupling cadherin-based adhesion 
from wingless signalling in Drosophila. Nature, 383, 627–630.[Medline]
Sastre,M., Steiner,H., Fuchs,K., Capell,A., Multhaup,G., Condron,M.M., 
Teplow,D.B. and Haass,C. (2001) Presenilin-dependent -secretase processing of 
ß-amyloid precursor protein at a site corresponding to the S3 cleavage of Notch. 
EMBO rep., 2, 835–841.[Abstract/Free Full Text]
Schroeter,E.H., Kisslinger,J.A. and Kopan,R. (1998) Notch-1 signalling requires 
ligand-induced proteolytic release of intracellular domain. Nature, 393, 
382–386.[Medline]
Schwarzman,A.L., Singh,N., Tsiper,M., Gregori,L., Dranovsky,A., Vitek,M.P., 
Glabe,C.G., St George-Hyslop,P.H. and Goldgaber,D. (1999) Endogenous presenilin 
1 redistributes to the surface of lamellipodia upon adhesion of Jurkat cells to 
a collagen matrix. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 96, 7932–7937.[Abstract/Free Full 
Text]
Selkoe,D.J. (2001) Alzheimer’s disease: genes, proteins, and therapy. Physiol. 
Rev., 81, 741–766.[Abstract/Free Full Text]
Shearman,M.S. et al. (2000) L-685,458, an aspartyl protease transition state 
mimic, is a potent inhibitor of amyloid ß-protein precursor -secretase activity. 
Biochemistry, 39, 8698–8704.[Medline]
Steinberg,M.S. and McNutt,P.M. (1999) Cadherins and their connections: adhesion 
junctions have broader functions. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol., 11, 554–560.[Medline]
Steinhusen,U., Weiske,J., Badock,V., Tauber,R., Bommert,K. and Huber,O. (2001) 
Cleavage and shedding of E-cadherin after induction of apoptosis. J. Biol. 
Chem., 276, 4972–4980.[Abstract/Free Full Text]
Tanaka,H., Shan,W., Phillips,G.R., Arndt,K., Bozdagi,O., Shapiro,L., 
Huntley,G.W., Benson,D.L. and Colman,D.R. (2000) Molecular modification of 
N-cadherin in response to synaptic activity. Neuron, 25, 93–107.[Medline]
Tang,L., Hung,C.P. and Schuman,E.M. (1998) A role for the cadherin family of 
cell adhesion molecules in hippocampal long-term potentiation. Neuron, 20, 
1165–1175.[Medline]
Tepass,U., Truong,K., Godt,D., Ikura,M. and Peifer,M. (2000) Cadherins in 
embryonic and neural morphogenesis. Nature Rev. Mol. Cell. Biol., 1, 91–100.
Thinakaran,G. et al. (1996) Endoproteolysis of presenilin 1 and accumulation of 
processed derivatives in vivo. Neuron, 17, 181–190.[Medline]
Thoreson,M.A., Anastasiadis,P.Z., Daniel,J.M., Ireton,R.C., Wheelock,M.J., 
Johnson,K.R., Hummingbird,D.K. and Reynolds,A.B. (2000) Selective uncoupling of 
p120(ctn) from E-cadherin disrupts strong adhesion. J. Cell Biol., 148, 
189–202.[Abstract/Free Full Text]
Vallorosi,C.J., Day,K.C., Zhao,X., Rashid,M.G., Rubin,M.A., Johnson,K.R., 
Wheelock,M.J. and Day,M.L. (2000) Truncation of the ß-catenin binding domain of 
E-cadherin precedes epithelial apoptosis during prostate and mammary involution. 
J. Biol. Chem., 275, 3328–3334.[Abstract/Free Full Text]
Xia,X., Qian,S., Soriano,S., Wu,Y., Fletcher,A.M., Wang,X.J., Koo,E.H., Wu,X. 
and Zheng,H. (2001) Loss of presenilin 1 is associated with enhanced ß-catenin 
signaling and skin tumorigenesis. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 98, 
10863–10868.[Abstract/Free Full Text]
Yu,C., Kim,S.H., Ikeuchi,T., Xu,H., Gasparini,L., Wang,R. and Sisodia,S.S. 
(2001) Characterization of a presenilin-mediated amyloid precursor protein 
carboxyl-terminal fragment . Evidence for distinct mechanisms involved in 
-secretase processing of the APP and Notch1 transmembrane domains. J. Biol. 
Chem., 276, 43756–43760.[Abstract/Free Full Text]


This article has been cited by other articles: 



      K. Xiao, D. F. Allison, M. D. Kottke, S. Summers, G. P. Sorescu, V. 
      Faundez, and A. P. Kowalczyk
      Mechanisms of VE-cadherin Processing and Degradation in Microvascular 
      Endothelial Cells
      J. Biol. Chem., May 23, 2003; 278(21): 19199 - 19208. 
      [Abstract] [Full Text] [PDF] 
       






      J. K. McGuire, Q. Li, and W. C. Parks
      Matrilysin (Matrix Metalloproteinase-7) Mediates E-Cadherin Ectodomain 
      Shedding in Injured Lung Epithelium
      Am. J. Pathol., June 1, 2003; 162(6): 1831 - 1843. 
      [Abstract] [Full Text] [PDF] 
       






      B. J. Schnapp
      Trafficking of signaling modules by kinesin motors
      J. Cell Sci., June 1, 2003; 116(11): 2125 - 2135. 
      [Abstract] [Full Text] [PDF] 
       






      T. Li, G. Ma, H. Cai, D. L. Price, and P. C. Wong
      Nicastrin Is Required for Assembly of Presenilin/gamma -Secretase 
      Complexes to Mediate Notch Signaling and for Processing and Trafficking of 
      beta -Amyloid Precursor Protein in Mammals
      J. Neurosci., April 15, 2003; 23(8): 3272 - 3277. 
      [Abstract] [Full Text] [PDF] 
       






      Y. Hirako, K. Yoshino, D. Zillikens, and K. Owaribe
      Extracellular Cleavage of Bullous Pemphigoid Antigen 180/Type XVII 
      Collagen and Its Involvement in Hemidesmosomal Disassembly
      J. Biochem. (Tokyo), February 1, 2003; 133(2): 197 - 206. 
      [Abstract] [Full Text] [PDF] 
       






      M. S. Wolfe
      {gamma}-Secretase--Intramembrane Protease with a Complex
      SAGE KE, March 19, 2003; 2003(11): pe7 - 7. 
      [Abstract] [Full Text] 
       






      T. E. Golde and C. B. Eckman
      Physiologic and Pathologic Events Mediated by Intramembranous and 
      Juxtamembranous Proteolysis
      Science's STKE, March 4, 2003; 2003(172): re4 - 4. 
      [Abstract] [Full Text] [PDF] 
       






      T. Ikeuchi and S. S. Sisodia
      The Notch Ligands, Delta1 and Jagged2, Are Substrates for 
      Presenilin-dependent "gamma -Secretase" Cleavage
      J. Biol. Chem., March 7, 2003; 278(10): 7751 - 7754. 
      [Abstract] [Full Text] [PDF] 
       






      R. Siman and J. Velji
      Localization of presenilin-nicastrin complexes and {gamma}-secretase 
      activity to the trans -Golgi network
      J. Neurochem., March 1, 2003; 84(5): 1143 - 1153. 
      [Abstract] [Full Text] [PDF] 
       






      T. Ikeuchi, G. Dolios, S.-H. Kim, R. Wang, and S. S. Sisodia
      Familial Alzheimer Disease-linked Presenilin 1 Variants Enhance Production 
      of Both Abeta 1-40 and Abeta 1-42 Peptides That Are Only Partially 
      Sensitive to a Potent Aspartyl Protease Transition State Inhibitor of 
      "gamma -Secretase"
      J. Biol. Chem., February 28, 2003; 278(9): 7010 - 7018. 
      [Abstract] [Full Text] [PDF] 
       






      A. Herreman, G. Van Gassen, M. Bentahir, O. Nyabi, K. Craessaerts, U. 
      Mueller, W. Annaert, and B. De Strooper
      {gamma}-Secretase activity requires the presenilin-dependent trafficking 
      of nicastrin through the Golgi apparatus but not its complex glycosylation
      J. Cell Sci., March 15, 2003; 116(6): 1127 - 1136. 
      [Abstract] [Full Text] [PDF] 
       






      M. F. Sernee, G. Evin, J. G. Culvenor, J. A. Villadangos, K. Beyreuther, 
      C. L. Masters, and R. Cappai
      Selecting cells with different Alzheimer's disease {gamma}-secretase 
      activity using FACS: Differential effect of presenilin exon 9 deletion on 
      {gamma}- and {epsilon}-cleavage
      Eur. J. Biochem., February 1, 2003; 270(3): 495 - 506. 
      [Abstract] [Full Text] [PDF] 
       






      D. Y. Kim, L. A. M. Ingano, and D. M. Kovacs
      Nectin-1alpha , an Immunoglobulin-like Receptor Involved in the Formation 
      of Synapses, Is a Substrate for Presenilin/gamma -Secretase-like Cleavage
      J. Biol. Chem., December 20, 2002; 277(51): 49976 - 49981. 
      [Abstract] [Full Text] [PDF] 
       






      S. Lammich, M. Okochi, M. Takeda, C. Kaether, A. Capell, A.-K. Zimmer, D. 
      Edbauer, J. Walter, H. Steiner, and C. Haass
      Presenilin-dependent Intramembrane Proteolysis of CD44 Leads to the 
      Liberation of Its Intracellular Domain and the Secretion of an Abeta -like 
      Peptide
      J. Biol. Chem., November 22, 2002; 277(47): 44754 - 44759. 
      [Abstract] [Full Text] [PDF] 
       






      R. C. Ireton, M. A. Davis, J. van Hengel, D. J. Mariner, K. Barnes, M. A. 
      Thoreson, P. Z. Anastasiadis, L. Matrisian, L. M. Bundy, L. Sealy, B. 
      Gilbert, F. van Roy, and A. B. Reynolds
      A novel role for p120 catenin in E-cadherin function
      J. Cell Biol., November 7, 2002; 159(3): 465 - 476. 
      [Abstract] [Full Text] [PDF] 
       






      M. H. Scheinfeld, E. Ghersi, K. Laky, B. J. Fowlkes, and L. D'Adamio
      Processing of beta -Amyloid Precursor-like Protein-1 and -2 by gamma 
      -Secretase Regulates Transcription
      J. Biol. Chem., November 15, 2002; 277(46): 44195 - 44201. 
      [Abstract] [Full Text] [PDF] 
       






      H. Komano, H. Shiraishi, Y. Kawamura, X. Sai, R. Suzuki, L. Serneels, M. 
      Kawaichi, T. Kitamura, and K. Yanagisawa
      A New Functional Screening System for Identification of Regulators for the 
      Generation of Amyloid beta -Protein
      J. Biol. Chem., October 18, 2002; 277(42): 39627 - 39633. 
      [Abstract] [Full Text] [PDF] 
       






      M. Okochi, H. Steiner, A. Fukumori, H. Tanii, T. Tomita, T. Tanaka, T. 
      Iwatsubo, T. Kudo, M. Takeda, and C. Haass
      Presenilins mediate a dual intramembranous {gamma}-secretase cleavage of 
      Notch-1
      EMBO J., October 15, 2002; 21(20): 5408 - 5416. 
      [Abstract] [Full Text] [PDF] 
       






      C. Kaether, S. Lammich, D. Edbauer, M. Ertl, J. Rietdorf, A. Capell, H. 
      Steiner, and C. Haass
      Presenilin-1 affects trafficking and processing of {beta}APP and is 
      targeted in a complex with nicastrin to the plasma membrane
      J. Cell Biol., August 5, 2002; 158(3): 551 - 561. 
      [Abstract] [Full Text] [PDF] 
       






      Q. Chen, H. Kimura, and D. Schubert
      A novel mechanism for the regulation of amyloid precursor protein 
      metabolism
      J. Cell Biol., July 8, 2002; 158(1): 79 - 89. 
      [Abstract] [Full Text] [PDF] 
       





             Abstract of this Article () 
             Reprint (PDF) Version of this Article 
             Similar articles found in:
            EMBO Journal Online 
            PubMed 
             PubMed Citation 
             This Article has been cited by: 
             Search Medline for articles by:
             Marambaud, P. || Robakis, N. K. 
             Alert me when: 
            new articles cite this article

             Download to Citation Manager 





       